Title: Learning Communication Between Heterogeneous Agents in Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Cyber Defence

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.20279v1

Published Time: Tue, 24 Mar 2026 00:03:29 GMT

Number of Pages: 6

Markdown Content:
# LEARNING COMMUNICATION BETWEEN HETEROGENEOUS AGENTS IN MULTI-AGENT REINFORCEMENT LEARNING FOR AUTONOMOUS CYBER DEFENCE 

ALEX POPA 1, ADRIAN TAYLOR 2, RANWA AL MALLAH 31Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Royal Military College of Canada, Kingston Ontario, Canada 

> 2

Defence Research and Development Canada, Ottawa Ontario, Canada 

> 3

Department of Computer Engineering and Software Engineering, Polytechnique Montr´ eal, Montr´ eal Qu´ ebec, Canada E-MAIL: alex.popa@rmc-cmr.ca, adrian.taylor@drdc-rddc.gc.ca, ranwa.al-mallah@polymtl.ca 

Abstract: 

Reinforcement learning techniques are being explored as solu-tions to the threat of cyber attacks on enterprise networks. Re-cent research in the field of AI in cyber security has investigated the ability of homogeneous multi-agent reinforcement learning agents, capable of inter-agent communication, to respond to cyber attacks. This paper advances the study of learned communication in multi-agent systems by examining heterogeneous agent capa-bilities within a simulated network environment. To this end, we leverage CommFormer, a publicly available state-of-the-art com-munication algorithm, to train and evaluate agents within the Cy-ber Operations Research Gym (CybORG). Our results show that CommFormer agents with heterogeneous capabilities can outper-form other algorithms deployed in the CybORG environment, by converging to an optimal policy up to four times faster while im-proving standard error by up 38%. The agents implemented in this project provide an additional avenue for exploration in the field of AI for cyber security, enabling further research involving realistic networks. 

Keywords: 

MARL; CybORG; CommFormer; AI for security; Cyber secu-rity; Inter-agent communication 

1. Introduction 

Modern computer and digital systems exist in a world of con-stant inter-connectivity where cyber threats pose a persistent risk to the daily lives of users [1]. The situation is further com-plicated by the rapid evolution of tactics, techniques and pro-cedures employed by malicious actors operating in the cyber domain. State-affiliated actors from great and middle powers across the world are increasingly leveraging AI and advanced techniques to circumvent traditional defences [2]. Recent re-porting from 2024 indicates sustained targeting of critical in-frastructure, highlighting a shift toward more sophisticated, large-scale campaigns against rival national interests [1][2]. To counter these evolving threats, researchers have looked toward Machine Learning (ML) as a means to secure the cy-ber domain. While Reinforcement Learning (RL) has proven effective for Network Intrusion Detection Systems (NIDS) in identifying malware and Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks, single-agent RL architectures have had limited success in responding to large-scale complex attacks [3][4]. Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) offers a scalable al-ternative by distributing detection and response across the net-work. MARL agents can be trained to replace or support an ex-isting Host-based Intrusion Detection System (HIDS), greatly extending the AI for security use case. While MARL algo-rithms provide a myriad of benefits [5], they often suffer from environmental instability [6]. Inter-agent communication has been proposed as a means to mitigate MARL instability [6]. Building upon the founda-tions established in [3], this work explores the application of MARL agents with heterogeneous capabilities, meaning var-ied observation and action spaces. By employing Comm-Former, a state-of-the-art communication algorithm [6], this work demonstrates that heterogeneous communication agents can outperform baselines established in the field [3]. 

2. Related Work 

MARL has been described as a natural extension of single-agent RL, where agents engaging in a shared environment learn 

> arXiv:2603.20279v1 [cs.CR] 17 Mar 2026

to map states to actions through an iterative trial-and-error pro-cess [3][6]. MARL applications have been aimed at address-ing scalability limitations associated with single-agent archi-tectures. This increase in agent numbers generally leads to dy-namic uncertainty and environment instability [6]. To mitigate this, researchers have used approaches like Centralized Train-ing Decentralized Execution (CTDE), which allows agents to share global information during training while operating inde-pendently during execution. Inter-agent communication further enhances coordination, particularly in partially observable en-vironments where agents have limited observation spaces and must learn to share vital data. Despite the advantages associ-ated with communication, drawbacks exist, such as increased bandwidth usage, slowdowns at inference time, and additional complexity in algorithm architecture. In the context of AI for cyber security, MARL agents contend with partial observability, sparse rewards, and high stochasticity. For instance, a host-based agent is limited to local observations, requiring communication to coordinate or sup-port a network-wide response [18]. Additionally, Autonomous Cyber Defence (ACD) requires multi-step responses to mali-cious actions, leading to delayed feedback for correct choices. Finally, the stochasticity of computer networks, where network traffic and benign user actions introduce significant noise, leads to a difficult learning environment. Despite these challenges, MARL agents can be tailored to niche roles, helping minimize the need for computational power, as well as to leverage ad-vanced communication algorithms, capable of limiting band-width requirements. The Reinforced Inter-Agent Learning (RIAL) algorithm, uti-lizing independent Q-networks, and the Differentiable Inter-Agent Learning (DIAL) [7] algorithm, enabling gradient shar-ing across agents, introduced deep Q-networks for communica-tion. Complementary Attention for Multi-Agent reinforcement learning (CAMA) [8], also using Q-Learning, attempts to op-timize agent observation spaces by dynamically altering agent observation spaces, a feature not currently supported by Cy-bORG. Communication Neural Network (CommNet) [9], using the REINFORCE training algorithm [10], builds a channel where agents transmit continuous vectors. CommNet’s multiple com-munication cycles per timestep demand excessive bandwidth, making it ill-suited for applications in ACD. Individualized Controlled Continuous Communication Model (IC3Net) [11], also trained via the REINFORCE algorithm, improves effi-ciency by introducing a gating mechanism which allows agents to learn when to communicate. While useful for mixed cooperative-competitive settings, IC3Net lacks demonstrated support for heterogeneous agents. Bidirectionally-Coordinated Network (BiCNet) [12], an early actor-critic example, requires the global state to be pro-vided at each timestep, an unrealistic expectation in partially observable environments. Targeted Multi-Agent Communica-tion (TarMAC) [13] utilizes an actor-critic architecture with a signature-based soft-attention mechanism, enabling agents to weigh message importance and target recipients. Similarly, Distributed Targeted Multi-Agent Communication (DTMAC) [14] adds historical message support. While highly effective, both algorithms were tested only on homogeneous agents. Multi-Agent Incentive Communication (MAIC) [15] em-ploys teammate modelling and Q-Learning to generate incen-tive messages that directly bias teammates’ local Q-value ta-bles. Although MAIC supports heterogeneous agents, this ab-stract communication lacks interpretability. Advanced graph-based approaches include Multi-Agent Graph-attentIon Communication (MAGIC) [16], Informa-tion Maximizing Gated Spares Multi-Agent Communication (IMGS-MAC) [17] and CommFormer [6]. MAGIC employs Graph Attention Networks (GATs) via a Scheduler and Mes-sage Processor to manage multi-round communication. IMGS-MAC enforces sparsity to maximize information sharing within strict bandwidth constraints. Despite their architectural advan-tages, these graph models lack publicly available code and veri-fied support for heterogeneous agents, ultimately leading to the use of CommFormer. 

3. Methodology 

We selected the CommFormer algorithm [6] for our use case as it was found to provide ”performance levels comparable to approaches that permit unrestricted information sharing among agents” [6] while modelling agents in an intuitive way. Comm-Former models multi-agent interactions as a Markov game de-fined by the tuple ⟨N , O, A, R, P, γ ⟩ where N is the number of agents, O is the joint observation space, A is the joint ac-tion space, A maps O and A to the reward range, mathcalP 

defines the probability function, and γ denotes the discount factor. Inter-agent communication is framed as a learnable di-rected graph G = ⟨V , E⟩ , optimizing both the graph structure and architectural parameters concurrently via a bi-level opti-mization process. In this graph, nodes represent agents ( N )and edges ( E) denote unidirectional communication channels. A sparsity parameter, S, strictly governs the number of active edges S × N 2, ensuring bandwidth efficiency. To train its agents, CommFormer employs an encoder-decoder transformer architecture which leverages a self-attention mechanism to calculate scores via Query, Key, and Value vectors, helping capture complex dependencies between agents and observations. Crucially, the learned communication graph masks information from other agents, restricting infor-mation flow strictly to authorized channels. Finally, the de-coder generates joint action sequences auto-regressively, feed-ing each generated action back into the decoder to inform the actions of other agents operating in the environment [6]. This work utilizes CyMARL, an extension of the CybORG [19] environment, built upon PyMARL2 [20], to train MARL algorithms for “tactical decision-making in cyber defence” [21]. Our baseline scenario, features a six-host, two-subnet net-work where a rigidly programmed red (attacker) agent method-ically seeks to exploit vulnerabilities and escalate privileges with the end goal of disrupting a critical server (OpServer). Defending the network are two blue (defender) agents, act-ing as subnet Intrusion Prevention Systems (IPS), which must learn to mitigate red incursions through actions like Monitor, Remove, Analyse, Restore, and Block. The training process is guided by a team-based reward function that heavily penal-izes the blue agents for allowing compromises to network as-sets as well as for unnecessarily disruptive defensive actions. To simulate realistic, partially observable conditions, the blue agents receive localized, binary-formatted observations of host and subnet statuses, while automatic monitoring actions only detect exploits with a 50% success rate, enabling red agents to establish covert, privileged footholds on network hosts. Blue agents are forced to learn indicators of compromise associated with undetected exploits as a result. CommFormer is implemented using the Python language, its code features a highly modular structure that can be eas-ily adjusted to interact with any environment capable of pro-cessing observation, reward and action sequences. The inte-gration of the CommFormer algorithm into CyMARL required the creation of two wrappers. The wrappers developed for this work use the CommFormer Predator-Prey/Predator-Capture-Prey environment scripts created by Hu et al. [6] as a base to build from. The higher level wrapper is focused on parsing command-line variables, such as hyperparemeters and system information (i.e. CUDA GPU availability and multi-processing settings), helping set up training the environments and sav-ing training data as needed. The underlying wrapper we de-velopped, focuses on the interacting with CyMARL. Its pseu-docode can be seen in Algorithm 1 below. Additional changes to both the CyMARL and CommFormer codebases include the addition of support for agents with dif-ferent observation and action spaces, the ability to log agent ac-tions during training and evaluation, the creation of CybORG 

Algorithm 1 CybORG Runner  

> 1:

Input: Arguments and CommFormer configuration data supplied by Train CyMARL CommFormer.  

> 2:

Initialize: CybORG runner class using the CommFormer runner class parent.  

> 3:

Calculate number of episodes using environment steps and number of multi-processing threads.  

> 4:

for episode in episodes do  

> 5:

Reset environment and Replay Buffer B. 

> 6:

Log communication channel matrix for the episode.  

> 7:

for step in training episode length do  

> 8:

Sample actions from CommFormer.  

> 9:

Observe reward, next observation and available ac-tions from CyMARL.  

> 10:

Insert data into buffer B. 

> 11:

end for  

> 12:

Compute return and update the CommFormer network.  

> 13:

Log information, actions and save model according to pre-defined logging interval.  

> 14:

Run evaluation episodes according to pre-defined evalu-ation interval.  

> 15:

end for 

environment interaction workers used in multi-processing, as well as numerous tweaks to variables exchanged between CyMARL and CommFormer. The CyMARL-CommFormer repository, including details regarding code changes, is avail-able publicly on GitHub [22]. 

4. Evaluation 

Following the integration of CommFormer into CyMARL, the algorithm was evaluated across three progressively complex scenarios to validate its performance and scalability against es-tablished baselines. 

Homogeneous Baseline . To ensure a fair comparison against prior DIAL implementations in CyMARL [3], this ini-tial scenario maintained an identical network topology (six hosts across two subnets), red agent attack path, and uniform blue agent action/observation spaces. Previously optimized hy-perparameters outlined in [3] and [6] were used to establish our baseline. 

Heterogeneous Agent Scenario . The scenario was then ad-justed by introducing a specialized firewall agent (BlueFW). This setup established heterogeneous agents with distinct ac-tion and observation spaces. The subnet agents (Blue0 and Blue1) were tasked with monitoring hosts and executing tar-FIGURE 1. Homogeneous agent scenario training curve. The inset plot shows best case scenario performance of approximately -4 average reward. 

geted mitigating actions, such as Remove, Restore, and Anal-yse, while the BlueFW agent was strictly limited to executing the Block action. Zero-padding was introduced to normalize the observation vector sizes across these varied agents. 

Host-Based Scenario . To test CommFormer’s scalability, the network was expanded to include individual blue agents for each host, simulating localized Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR) applications operating alongside the central BlueFW agent. Because this restricted each agent’s observa-tion space to a single host, training instability emerged. Conse-quently, the reward function was adjusted to increase penalties for unnecessary Analyse actions while discounting correctly coordinated Block actions. Additional hyperparameter tuning (e.g., entropy coefficient, PPO clip) was conducted to prevent convergence on sub-optimal policies. 

5. Results 

Homogeneous Baseline . CommFormer was evaluated throughout a 20 million timestep training session using the homogeneous baseline scenario discussed in the previous sec-tion. It demonstrated superior learning efficiency, converging to a semi-optimal policy nearly four times faster than the Cy-MARL DIAL baseline. CommFormer achieved more stable mean rewards during training −6.54 ± 5.11 compared to DIAL 

−7.9 ± 14 .39 . Episode logs confirmed this success stemmed from effective communication, as evidenced by an agent de-tecting a network scan successfully and relaying this data, en-abling a peer to execute targeted remediations on a compro-mised pivot host. Figure 1 illustrates the mean reward assigned to the CommFormer and DIAL agents as they were trained. 

Heterogeneous Agent Scenario . CommFormer was subse-quently trained and evaluated over 5 million timesteps using the adjusted heterogeneous agent scenario which introduced a spe-cialized firewall agent (BlueFW) alongside subnet agents. The model experienced a minor performance drop (training mean reward of −9.18 ± 8.89 ) but maintained rapid convergence. Communication across agents was once again demonstrated when a subnet agent successfully detected a vulnerability scan and alerted the BlueFW agent, whose observation space is lim-ited to the blocked/unblocked status of subnets, prompting im-mediate network-level mitigation via a Block subnet action. Figure 2 illustrates the mean reward assigned to the Comm-Former heterogeneous agents during training. 

Host-Based Scenario . The final scenario simulated local-ized EDR agents deployed per host, strictly limiting local ob-servations. The severe restrictions placed on CommFormer un-derscored the necessity for inter-agent communication. While extreme sparsity occasionally delayed initial detections, active channels ultimately routed critical indicators of compromise. Evaluation logs confirmed that isolated host agents successfully initiated Analyse and Restore actions based entirely on obser-vations communicated by peer agents, demonstrating Comm-Former’s efficacy in decentralized, highly restricted environ-ments. Figure 3 illustrates the training and evaluation curves for this scenario. FIGURE 2. Heterogeneous agent scenario training curve. 

6. Conclusion 

This work successfully adapted the CommFormer algorithm and integrated it into CyMARL to evaluate heterogeneous multi-agent reinforcement learning for ACD. Compared to es-tablished DIAL baselines, CommFormer achieved comparable overall performance but converged to near-optimal policies sig-nificantly faster. When scaled to complex heterogeneous and highly stochastic host-based scenarios, the agents effectively coordinated mitigating actions across varied observation and action spaces. Although this scalability demonstrated peak per-formance exceeding baselines, the model exhibited late-stage training instability, necessitating specific hyperparameter and reward tuning. Ultimately, this research validates the efficacy of heterogeneous communicating agents in ACD, establishing a robust foundation for future complex network defence simu-lations. 

References 

[1] Government of Canada, “National Cyber Threat Assessment 2025-2026”, Canadian Centre for Cyber Security, Oct. 30, 2024. https://www.cyber.gc.ca/en/guidance/national-cyber-threat-assessment-2025-2026 [2] “2025 Global Threat Report,” Tech. Rep., CrowdStrike, 2025. [3] F. Contractor and R. Al-Mallah, “Learning to com-municate in multi-agent reinforcement learning for au-tonomous cyber defence,” Master’s thesis, Royal Military College of Canada, 2024. [4] T. T. Nguyen and V. J. Reddi, “Deep reinforcement learn-ing for cyber security,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Net-works and Learning Systems, vol. 34, p. 3779–3795, Aug. 2023. [5] M. Lanctot, V. Zambaldi, A. Gruslys, A. Lazaridou, K. Tuyls, J. P ´erolat, D. Silver, and T. Graepel, “A uni-fied game-theoretic approach to multi-agent reinforce-ment learning,” Advances in neural information process-ing systems, vol. 30, 2017. [6] S. Hu, L. Shen, Y. Zhang, and D. Tao, “Learning multi-agent communication from graph modeling perspective,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.08550, 2024. [7] J. Foerster, I. A. Assael, N. De Freitas, and S. Whiteson, “Learning to communicate with deep multi-agent rein-forcement learning,” Advances in neural information pro-cessing systems, vol. 29, 2016. [8] J. Shao, H. Zhang, Y. Qu, C. Liu, S. He, Y. Jiang, and X. Ji, “Complementary attention for multi-agent reinforce-ment learning,” in International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 30776–30793, PMLR, 2023. FIGURE 3. Homogeneous agent scenario training curve. The inset plot provides a closer view of peak performance across training and evaluation episodes. 

[9] S. Sukhbaatar, R. Fergus, et al., “Learning multiagent communication with backpropagation,” Advances in neu-ral information processing systems, vol. 29, 2016. [10] R. J. Williams, “Simple statistical gradient-following al-gorithms for connectionist reinforcement learning,” Ma-chine learning, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 229–256, 1992. [11] A. Singh, T. Jain, and S. Sukhbaatar, “Learning when to communicate at scale in multiagent cooperative and com-petitive tasks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.09755, 2018. [12] P. Peng, Y. Wen, Y. Yang, Q. Yuan, Z. Tang, H. Long, and J. Wang, “Multiagent bidirectionally-coordinated nets: Emergence of human-level coordination in learn-ing to play starcraft combat games,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.10069, 2017. [13] A. Das, T. Gervet, J. Romoff, D. Batra, D. Parikh, M. Rabbat, and J. Pineau, “Tarmac: Targeted multi-agent communication,” in International Conference on machine learning, pp. 1538–1546, PMLR, 2019. [14] C. Xu, H. Zhang, and Y. Zhang, “Multi-agent reinforce-ment learning with distributed targeted multi-agent com-munication,” in 2023 35th Chinese Control and Decision Conference (CCDC), pp. 2915–2920, IEEE, 2023. [15] L. Yuan, J. Wang, F. Zhang, C. Wang, Z. Zhang, Y. Yu, and C. Zhang, “Multi-agent incentive communication via decentralized teammate modeling,” in Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, vol. 36, pp. 9466–9474, 2022. [16] Y. Niu, R. R. Paleja, and M. C. Gombolay, “Multi-agent graph-attention communication and teaming.,” in AA-MAS, vol. 21, p. 20th, 2021. [17] S. Karten, M. Tucker, S. Kailas, and K. Sycara, “Towards true lossless sparse communication in multi-agent sys-tems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.00115, 2022 [18] S. Sukhbaatar, R. Fergus, et al., “Learning multiagent communication with backpropagation,” Advances in neu-ral information processing systems, vol. 29, 2016. [19] M. Standen, M. Lucas, D. Bowman, T. J. Richer, J. Kim, and D. Marriott, “Cyborg: A gym for the de-velopment of autonomous cyber agents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.09118, 2021. [20] PyMARL 2, 2021, accessed: 2025-07-08. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/hijkzzz/pymarl2 [21] J. Wiebe, R. A. Mallah, and L. Li, “Learning cyber de-fence tactics from scratch with multi-agent reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05939, 2023. [22] CyMARL-CommFormer, 2025, accessed: 2025-12-03. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/Poly-AIvsAI/CyMARL-CommFormer.