Title: VLM-AutoDrive: Post-Training Vision-Language Models for Safety-Critical Autonomous Driving Events

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.18178v1

Published Time: Fri, 20 Mar 2026 00:14:11 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# VLM-AutoDrive: Post-Training Vision-Language Models for Safety-Critical Auto nomous Driv ing Events 

Mohammad Qazim Bhat * Yufan Huang Niket Agarwal Hao Wang Michael Woods John Kenyon Tsung-Yi Lin Xiaodong Yang Ming-Yu Liu Kevin Xie 

NVIDIA, California, USA 

Abstract 

The rapid growth of ego-centric dashcam footage presents a major challenge for detecting safety-critical events such as collisions and near-collisions—scenarios that are brief, rare, and difficult for generic vision mod-els to capture. While multimodal large language mod-els (MLLMs) demonstrate strong general reasoning ability, they underperform in driving contexts due to domain and temporal misalignment. We introduce VLM-AutoDrive, a modular post-training framework for adapting pretrained Vision-Language Mod-els (VLMs) to high-fidelity anomaly detection. The frame-work integrates metadata-derived captions, LLM-generated descriptions, visual question answering (VQA) pairs, and chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning supervision to enable domain-aligned and interpretable learning. Off-the-shelf VLMs such as NVIDIA’s Cosmos-Reason1 7B (CR1) exhibit near-zero Collision recall in zero-shot settings; fine-tuning with VLM-AutoDrive improves Collision F1 from 0.00 to 0.69 and overall accuracy from 35.3% to 77.27%. VLM-AutoDrive offers a scalable recipe for adapting general-purpose VLMs to safety-critical, temporally local-ized perception tasks. Evaluated on real-world Nexar dash-cam videos, it achieves substantial gains in Collision and Near-Collision detection while producing interpretable rea-soning traces, bridging the gap between perception, causal-ity, and decision reasoning in autonomous driving. 

1. Introduction 

The widespread deployment of dashcams in consumer vehicles has resulted in an enormous volume of ego-centric video data, capturing diverse driving scenarios across real-world environments. These video streams are a rich 

> *Corresponding author

source of information for downstream applications such as driver behavior analysis, traffic safety monitoring, in-surance automation, and autonomous driving system val-idation. However, detecting critical events such as col-lisions, near-collisions, and traffic anomalies within these high-frame-rate, untrimmed videos remains a difficult and labor-intensive task. MLLMs, which integrate visual and textual reason-ing into a unified architecture, have shown impressive re-sults across general tasks such as VQA, captioning, and video understanding. Despite these capabilities, pretrained VLMs fail to generalize effectively to the domain of driv-ing anomaly detection. Our experiments show that even advanced models such as CR1 [14] demonstrate near-zero precision and recall for the Collision class when evaluated in a zero-shot setting. These models consistently default to predicting “Normal Driving”, highlighting a strong domain gap and a lack of temporal sensitivity. To address this, we propose a modular and extensi-ble post-training framework to adapt pretrained VLMs for safety-critical, temporally localized driving tasks. Instead of building a model from scratch, our goal is to unlock the capabilities of powerful general-purpose VLMs by ex-posing them to domain-aligned supervision. The proposed framework comprises the following key components: • Empirical analysis of zero-shot limitations in pre-trained VLMs, revealing their ineffectiveness in fine-grained, high-risk driving scenarios. • A flexible post-training framework combining SFT and RL, suitable for domain adaptation using limited labeled data. • A scalable supervision pipeline that generates diverse multimodal signals such as metadata-based captions, synthetic LLM outputs, VQA pairs, and multiple-choice questions (MCQs) to guide model adaptation. 1        

> arXiv:2603.18178v1 [cs.CV] 18 Mar 2026 6s chunk …
> …
> T1-T6
> Sliding
> Window
> Chunking
> (CVC)
> (T 1+0.5) –(T 6+0.5)
> T1–T4
> 40s input video clips
> 6s chunk
> …
> 4s chunk

Figure 1. Sliding Window Chunking. 

• Ablation studies identifying key success factors ,such as frame rate sensitivity, data diversity, class bal-ancing, and optimal hyperparameters. • A system architecture that is extensible beyond Col-lision detection, enabling future expansion to other anomaly classes with minimal retraining effort. • Integration into Cosmos Video Curator (CVC): We aim to make our full annotation pipeline available via CVC, which is already used for video chunking and captioning. Together, our findings underscore the necessity of domain-aligned supervision and post-training to unlock the full potential of VLMs in safety-critical automotive con-texts. Our current system is trained to classify videos into three categories: Normal Driving , Near-Collision , and Collision .However, the architecture is designed to be easily extended to additional anomaly types such as sudden braking, traffic violations, or unsafe lane changes, by updating the super-vision pipeline and label set with minimal retraining. This paper presents our end-to-end framework and evaluates it on a representative dashcam dataset collected from Nexar. We also conduct ablations on data diversity, class imbalance, and frame rate sensitivity to identify key success factors. Our goal is not to propose a novel algorithm, but to pro-vide a practical, reproducible pipeline for adapting VLMs to safety-critical perception tasks in the automotive domain. 

2. Related Work 

2.1. VLMs for Video Understanding 

The field of VLMs is seeing a surge in research. The development of closed-source foundation models like GPT-4V [15] and Gemini [4] has inspired the research commu-nity to develop open-source VLMs and pre-training frame-works, with recent models like LLaVA [8], Qwen-VL [1], InternVL [20], and NVILA [9] leading the way. These mod-els are being applied in various scenarios, from robotics to autonomous driving. Inspired by reasoning LLMs like DeepSeek-R1 [3], re-cent work has focused on developing reasoning VLMs. Models such as LLaVA-CoT [18], CR1 [14] and Long-RL [2] aim to build a chain-of-thought to enable more com-plex reasoning. NVIDIA’s CR1 [14] is a prominent example of a VLM post-trained on data requiring physical common sense and embodied reasoning, enabling it to output a chain-of-thought reasoning before providing an answer. 

2.2. VLMs in Autonomous Driving 

VLMs are increasingly being integrated into autonomous driving systems to enhance reasoning, interpretability, and generalization. By unifying perception and language under-standing in a shared embedding space, VLMs demonstrate improved zero-shot performance across diverse driving con-ditions and rare scenarios. Prior work on safety-critical driving-video understand-ing includes dashcam anomaly benchmarks (DoTA [6]) and risk-aware captioning/localization (DRAMA [10]). Early approaches like GPT-Driver [11] show that frozen VLMs can generate control plans and rationales from vi-sual and textual inputs, but they suffer from poor spatial grounding and ambiguous outputs. To overcome these issues, recent works such as BEVDriver [17], TOKEN [7], and Sce2DriveX [19] enhance spatial understanding. DriveVLM [16] framework employs a chain-of-thought process including scene description, analysis, and hierar-chical planning and introduces a hybrid DriveVLM-Dual [16] system that combines VLM reasoning with traditional 3D perception for improved spatial grounding and real-time control in AV scenarios. More recently, CR1 [14] extends VLM capabilities to the autonomous driving domain by in-corporating physical common sense and embodied reason-ing through chain-of-thought supervision. It enables mod-els to produce interpretable, multi-step rationales for com-plex driving scenarios, improving temporal and causal un-derstanding. 

3. Methodology 

We propose a modular, post-training framework to adapt pretrained VLMs for detecting anomalous driving events in ego-centric dashcam footage. The design is guided by two observations: (1) general-purpose VLMs underperform in this domain due to a lack of task-specific supervision and sensitivity to short-duration events, and (2) adapting pow-erful pretrained models is more efficient and scalable than training from scratch. Our framework emphasizes data-centric adaptation, using diverse, domain-aligned supervi-sion signals to bridge the gap between open-domain rea-soning and high-fidelity automotive perception. 2CVC    

> Chunking +
> Captioning
> Vision Encoder
> Projector (MLP)
> Generative Decoder
> "video_type ": " nv_collision ”
> "state": "New York”
> "city": "Bensonhurst”
> "avg_speed ": 2.67
> "max_speed ": 2.904
> "" Role_of_nexar_vehicle ": "Was hit by a
> 3rd party”
> "Nexar_vehicle_type ": "Car”
> "Third_party_type ": "Car”
> "Nexar_vehicle_impact_side ": "Front”
> "Third_party_impact_side ": "Rear”
> "Nexar_vehicle_motion ": "forward -
> straight”
> Third_party_motion ": "forward -straight”
> "Density_of_vehicles_on_road ": "High
> "Third_party_blame ": "High”
> "Driver_blame ": "Low”
> "Road_conditions ”: "Dry”
> "Weather_conditions ": "Clear sky”
> "Light_conditions ": "Daylight”
> "Visibility_conditions ": "Excellent”
> "video_event_time ": 20.166
> Reasoning VQA Generation
> (DeepSeek -R1 -Distill -Llama -70B)
> Short QA Generation
> (LLaMA -3.1 -70B)

6s chunked video clips 

Human Labeled/Vehicle 

Metadata 

Data Augmentation 

Pipeline 

> Text
> tokens
> Token Embedding

40s video clips 

Reasoning 

on/off 

Cosmos -Reason1 

> …
> Cosmos -Reason1 Blocks
> Off -the -shelf Tools
> Outputs
> Input / output

Input Videos/VLM Captions 

> High -FPS
> Training
> Short Caption Generation
> (Gemini -2.5)
> Augmented Caption Generation
> (LLaMA -3.1 -70B)
> Think Trace Generation
> (DeepSeek -R1 -Distill -Llama -70B
> …
> Vision
> tokens
> Other
> Annotations
> Reasoning
> Question
> Suffix

Text Annotations                                                       

> Please answer the question in the following format :
> <think> your reasoning </think> <answer> your answer
> </answer>
> MCQ
> Question
> Q:Choose the most accurate description of this
> driving event from the following options :
> A.The vehicle collides with another vehicle or
> object .
> B.The vehicle drives normally with no incident .
> C.The vehicle nearly collides but avoids an
> accident .
> A:A.The vehicle collides with another vehicle or object .Response
> Loss

Figure 2. System Diagram. 

3.1. Problem Setup 

We formulate the task as short-duration video classifica-tion for safety-critical driving events. Given an ego-centric dashcam video clip of 4–6 seconds, the objective is to as-sign one of three driving event labels: • Normal Driving : No incident occurs. • Near-Collision : A close call where the ego vehicle narrowly avoids impact. • Collision : A physical contact involving the ego vehicle and another vehicle, pedestrian, or object. These clips are extracted from longer dashcam videos using a sliding-window chunking strategy. Critical events often span just 5–15 frames, requiring high frame rates and fine-grained temporal sensitivity for reliable detection. Despite the simplicity of the classification task, several challenges make it uniquely difficult in real-world settings. 

3.1.1 Key Challenges 

• High Temporal Fidelity : The Collision and Near-Collision classes are extremely brief, often visible in fewer than 0.5 seconds of footage, necessitating fine-grained temporal modeling at 30 FPS or higher. • Severe Class Imbalance : Real-world dashcam data is dominated by uneventful driving, making anoma-lous events such as collisions extremely rare. This bias severely hampers model generalization to safety-critical cases. • Sparse Multimodal Supervision : Raw labels alone are insufficient for adapting general-purpose VLMs. Rich, task-specific supervision such as captions, VQA, and reasoning traces are essential for learning causal and contextual cues. 

3.2. VLM-AutoDrive System Components 

We propose VLM-AutoDrive , a modular post-training framework for adapting general-purpose VLMs to safety-critical driving anomaly detection. Rather than training from scratch, we expose pretrained VLMs to a rich, task-aligned supervision pipeline that enhances their temporal sensitivity, causal reasoning, and safety-critical classifica-tion ability. Figure 2 provides an overview of the full sys-tem pipeline. 

Overview. The VLM-AutoDrive pipeline consists of three main components: • Input Source : 40-second ego-centric dashcam videos, manually labeled with event annotations and aug-3mented with structured metadata (e.g., vehicle motion, impact side, blame). • Multimodal Supervision Generation : We convert raw inputs into diverse supervision signals including MCQs, captions, VQA pairs, and reasoning traces, to guide supervised fine-tuning (SFT). These annotations are synthesized using a combination of rule-based tem-plates, LLM prompting (e.g., LLaMA-3.1, Gemini), and video captioning VLMs (e.g., NVILA, CR1). • Fine-tuning Strategy : The synthesized dataset is used to post-train models via SFT, optionally followed by reinforcement learning (RL) to further align reasoning behavior with driving-specific objectives. We begin by framing driving event classification as a supervised MCQ task. From the chunked dataset, we construct approximately 53,000 MCQ samples, split into 45,000 training samples. From the remaining samples, we use 198 samples (66 each for the three classes) as our test set. Each MCQ presents a short video clip (or its textual description) and asks the model to choose the correct event label from three options. This serves as the foundation for subsequent multimodal augmentations (see Figure 3). Building on this baseline, we generate richer annotations through a multi-stage process: • Caption Generation: We use VLMs such as Gem-ini [4] and NVILA [9] to generate generic visual cap-tions. • Metadata-to-Text Conversion: Structured metadata which includes scene context, incident details, and blame assessment is programmatically converted into detailed textual descriptions. • VQA Pair Generation: We use LLaMA-3.1-70B [5] to generate spatial, environmental, and causal ques-tions and answers based on the metadata-derived cap-tions. • Reasoning MCQ Creation: Finally, we use DeepSeek-R1-Distill-LLaMA-70B [3] to create chain-of-thought MCQs, preserving and enhancing causal reasoning capabilities in the fine-tuned CR1 [14]. Further details of the prompting pipeline are provided in Section 3.3, with full templates in the Appendix. 

3.2.1 Video Chunking and Captioning 

The raw dataset consists of approximately 10,000 40-second ego-centric videos from the Nexar dashcam plat-form [12], including around 1,000 labeled as Collision and 9,000 as Near-Collision clips. To address the short temporal span of anomalies and the limited context window of VLMs, we apply CVC to seg-ment each video into shorter 4–6 second clips. This sliding-window chunking strategy serves two key purposes: • It increases the effective frame rate presented to the model during training, enabling better detection of fine-grained, temporally localized events. • It expands the dataset to approximately 53,000 anno-tated clips, with each original video yielding 6–7 over-lapping segments and only one of which typically con-tains the anomalous event. The rest are labeled as nor-mal driving. In addition to chunking, CVC performs short caption generation for each video segment using off-the-shelf video captioning VLMs [13], providing initial visual summaries for further annotation steps. 

3.3. Dataset and annotations 

Our dataset is sourced from real-world dashcam footage collected by the Nexar platform. It consists of approxi-mately 10,000 ego-centric videos, each 40 seconds long, annotated with high-level driving event labels and fine-grained structured metadata (e.g., vehicle roles, motion, im-pact sides, blame assessments, and environmental condi-tions). To enable fine-grained anomaly detection, we apply the chunking strategy described in Section 3.2.1, which ex-pands the dataset to ∼53,000 short clips of 4–6 seconds each. These chunks serve as the primary units for all an-notation and model input. The resulting dataset exhibits a significant class imbal-ance with 43,000 Normal Driving , 9,000 Near-Collision ,and 1,000 Collision examples. This skew reflects real-world driving but presents chal-lenges for learning safety-critical behaviors. In Sec-tion 4.5.5, we describe our balancing strategy to mitigate this issue. Each chunk is further enriched through a multi-stage an-notation pipeline (Figure 3), which generates MCQs, struc-tured and LLM-generated captions, VQA pairs, and chain-of-thought reasoning traces. These annotations form the foundation of our supervised fine-tuning dataset described in Table 1. 

3.3.1 Human-Labeled Annotations and Metadata In-tegration 

Each 40-second video includes human-annotated event la-bels and fine-grained metadata, capturing attributes such as vehicle roles, motion patterns, impact sides, blame assign-ment, and environmental context. This metadata provides 4Structured Caption 

Q: Describe what is happening in the video .

A: The dashcam footage shows a car driving down a multi -

lane road on a sunny day . The sun's glare is visible on the 

windshield . The car maintains a consistent speed and 

passes several businesses .

Q: Describe the video using a detailed caption . Also 

mention whether it is a normal driving, a collision event 

or a near collision event 

A: A dashcam recording from an ego vehicle, a car in an 

urban area on the main road . The event is captured 

during daylight , under clear sky , having excellent 

visibility , the road conditions were dry . Vehicle density 

on the road was high . The ego vehicle was moving 

forward and driving straight . The third party was moving 

forward and driving straight . The ego vehicle was hit by 

a 3rd party vehicle , a car . The region of impact on the 

ego vehicle was on its front . The region of impact on 

the third party was on its rear . Here is the Blame 

assessment : the driver had low blame, the third party 

had high blame . This driving video captures a collision 

event ."

MCQ Question 

Thinking -on 

A: <think> 

Okay, so I'm trying to figure out what type of driving event 

occurs in this video . Let me start by visualizing ….. 

The key point here is that the ego vehicle was hit by the 

third -party vehicle . The impact on the ego vehicle is on its 

front, and on the third -party vehicle, the impact is on its 

rear ….. 

So, putting it all together, the event is a collision where 

the ego vehicle is struck from behind by another vehicle .

Therefore, the driving event is a collision between two 

vehicles .

</think> 

<answer> A</answer> 

Q: Choose the most accurate description of this driving 

event from the following options :

A. The vehicle collides with another vehicle or object .

B. The vehicle drives normally with no incident .

C. The vehicle nearly collides but avoids an accident .

Reasoning MCQ 

Q: What is the most likely reason for the collision based 

on the impact locations and blame assessment? 

A. The third party failed to stop at a red light. 

B. The ego vehicle stopped without warning. 

C. The third party was following too closely. 

D. The ego vehicle changed lanes abruptly. 

A: <think> 

The collision occurred with the third party's rear 

impacting the ego vehicle's front, indicating the third 

party hit the ego from behind. The third -party vehicle’s 

actions were the primary cause .

The ego vehicle seems to have low blame which implies 

they were not at fault, making sudden stops or lane 

changes by the ego less likely. The most plausible 

explanation is the third party was following too closely, 

unable to stop in time, leading to the collision. 

</think> 

<answer> C</answer> 

Short QA 

Q: Who was primarily at fault for the event shown? 

A. The ego vehicle driver 

B. The road conditions were responsible 

C. The third -party vehicle driver 

D. Both drivers shared equal blame” 

A: C.

A: A.The vehicle collides with another vehicle or object .

Thinking -off 

Short Caption Figure 3. Data Pipeline Examples. 

structured semantic cues beyond simple class labels, form-ing the basis for generating diverse textual annotations used in downstream supervision. 

3.3.2 Multiple-Choice Question (MCQ) Data 

We frame event classification as a supervised multiple-choice task. From the chunked dataset, we construct 

∼53,000 MCQ samples. This format serves as the founda-tion for subsequent caption, VQA, and reasoning augmen-tations (Figure 3). 

3.3.3 Caption Augmentation 

To provide richer visual context, we generate two types of captions: • Short Captions: Generic descriptions generated by Gemini-2.5 [4], applied to each chunked clip, yielding 

∼50,000 samples. • Metadata-Derived Captions: Structured, scene-specific descriptions programmatically created from Nexar metadata, encoding key details like motion, im-pact side, blame, and weather. This produces ∼20,000 high-precision captions. 

3.3.4 Visual Question Answering (VQA) Augmenta-tion 

From the structured captions, we use LLaMA-3.1-70B [5] to generate ∼140,000 VQA pairs that include approxi-mately seven targeted questions per clip. These questions span spatial, environmental, causal, and blame-related as-pects (Appendix Fig. A.1). VQA supervision complements the MCQ format by encouraging fine-grained visual reason-ing rather than classification alone. 

3.3.5 Reasoning and Think Trace Generation 

Post-training without explicit reasoning supervision of-ten leads to catastrophic forgetting of pretrained chain-of-thought capabilities. To prevent this, we incorporate rea-soning traces using DeepSeek-R1-Distill-LLaMA-70B [3]. These traces explicitly encode step-by-step reasoning, pre-serving causal reasoning performance. We generate two types of reasoning data: • Reasoning MCQs: We augment MCQ samples with think traces, model-generated justifications preceding the final answer. VLM-generated caption, enriched de-tailed caption, and a classification question for each sample is fed into a reasoning LLM, DeepSeek-R1 in this case. Only the samples with correct output an-5swers from the LLM are retained, resulting in ∼12,000 reasoning-augmented MCQs (Appendix Fig. A.3). • General Reasoning VQA: To broaden reasoning be-yond classification, we generate open-ended question-answer-reason triplets [2]. DeepSeek-R1 is prompted with a combination of VLM and metadata-derived cap-tions to generate explanations about context, causality, and intent (Appendix Fig. A.2). 

3.3.6 CR1 SFT AV Reasoning Data 

In addition to the MCQ, caption, and reasoning datasets, we incorporated approximately 12,000 autonomous-vehicle (AV) reasoning samples from the SFT stage of the origi-nal CR1 training pipeline. These samples contain chain-of-thought reasoning traces tailored for embodied reasoning in driving scenarios. 

3.3.7 Final Dataset Mixture 

The initial MCQ dataset exhibited a pronounced class im-balance, with ∼43,000 Normal Driving, ∼9,000 Near-Collision, and ∼1,000 Collision cases. To mitigate this, Collision and Near-Collision samples were up-sampled by factors of 15 × and 2 ×, respectively, yielding a balanced set of ∼11,000 Collision, ∼14,000 Near-Collision, and 

∼43,000 Normal Driving cases for primary training. For optimal performance, we curated a multi-source mixture of approximately 349,000 annotations, integrat-ing diverse supervision signals across modalities such as MCQ, detailed captions, VLM-generated captions (Gem-ini), VQA, and reasoning data. The complete breakdown, including counts, origins, and annotation methods, is sum-marized in Table 1. 

3.3.8 Post-Training Strategy 

Our initial evaluation revealed that zero-shot models failed to detect high-temporal-fidelity events, achieving 0% re-call on Collision cases and overall accuracy close to ran-dom chance. Most VLMs, including CR1 [14], even with reasoning enabled, consistently misclassified all events as Normal Driving. This pronounced domain gap highlighted the need for targeted post-training to adapt models to ego-centric driving incident detection. 

Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT): We adapt the base VLM by fine-tuning it with curated multimodal supervision signals, formatted as instruction-style prompts for classifi-cation and VQA objectives. Video–text pairs are tokenized, paired with corresponding labels, and optimized to align the model’s perception and reasoning capabilities with the driv-ing anomaly detection task. 

3.4. Model Selection 

Our primary model in focus is CR1 [14] because it is explicitly post-trained for embodied reasoning and physical common sense, unlike most general-purpose VLMs. We also used NVILA-8B Video [9] and Qwen2.5-VL-7B 

[1]. 

3.4.1 CR1 Foundation Model 

CR1 is a multimodal large language model developed by NVIDIA for “Physical AI” tasks. It features a 7-billion-parameter transformer backbone capable of processing both visual and textual inputs. A vision transformer encoder ex-tracts features from images or video frames, which are then projected into the text embedding space before being passed to the LLM decoder. The decoder processes these aligned visual and textual tokens to produce a response. A key strength of CR1 is its post-training on datasets requiring physical commonsense and embodied reasoning, enabling it to generate chain-of-thought explanations be-fore delivering an answer. This makes it particularly well-suited for interpreting driving scenes, where understanding physics and temporal dynamics is critical. 

3.5. Extensibility 

The proposed framework is modular, enabling the addi-tion of new driving anomaly types with minimal retraining. Introducing a new class (e.g., Sudden Stop ) involves: • Updating the metadata parser and caption templates • Generating targeted VQA/MCQ samples via LLM prompts • Expanding the label set and post-training on the aug-mented dataset This design ensures scalability as new events and datasets emerge. The framework can capture a wide range of anomalies such as red light violations, stop sign vio-lations, illegal turns, no-entry violations, sharp cornering, hard acceleration, and hard braking, by making minor ad-justments to the data pipeline. Several of these classes (e.g., sharp cornering, hard acceleration/braking) already have human-annotated ground truth and will be integrated into future post-training data recipes. 

3.6. Implementation Details 

We use NVIDIA CR1 as the base VLM. Post-training is performed on a mixture of human-labeled and LLM-augmented annotations derived from Nexar videos. Per-formance is evaluated using precision, recall, and F1 score across the three primary classes, with ablation studies mea-suring the impact of each supervision signal. 6Table 1. Summary of Data Mixture for SFT grouped into Understanding and Reasoning splits 

Category Annotation Type Approx. Count Source/Description Understanding 

MCQ Data (Unbalanced) ∼53,000 From Nexar videos - 1k Collision, 9k Near-Collision, 43k Normal MCQ Data (Upsampled) ∼68,000 Balanced (11k Collision, 14k Near-Collision, 43k Normal) Detailed Caption Data ∼20,000 Rule-based, using Nexar video metadata Gemini Caption Data ∼50,000 From chunked Nexar videos using Gemini VQA Data ∼124,000 From detailed captions via LLaMA-3.1-70B 

Reasoning 

AV Reasoning Data ∼12,000 From CR1 SFT stage MCQ Reasoning Data ∼12,000 From Detailed and VLM captions using DeepSeek R1 VQA Reasoning Data ∼10,000 From Detailed and VLM captions using DeepSeek R1 

Total Approx. Count ∼349,000 –

3.7. Key Factors for Success 

Ablation studies identified the following as critical to performance improvements: • Diverse supervision: Combining MCQ, captions, and open-ended QA enhanced generalization. • Balanced class distribution: Prevented bias toward the dominant “Normal Driving” class. • High temporal fidelity: 30 FPS and high-resolution video were essential for event capture. • Optimized learning rate: 1×10 −5 yielded stable and effective training. • SFT over zero-shot: SFT significantly improved Col-lision detection. • Reasoning-enriched data: Incorporating think-trace reasoning data preserved and enhanced causal reason-ing capabilities, preventing catastrophic forgetting dur-ing SFT. 

4. Experiments and Results 

Our experiments involved extensive fine-tuning of CR1 ,

NVILA-8B Video , and Qwen2.5-VL-7B .

4.1. Experimental Setup 

4.1.1 Dataset 

We evaluate our framework on the ∼53,000 chunked clips derived from the Nexar dashcam dataset using our anno-tation pipeline (Section 3.3) on classification score on the three categories. These clips are 4–6 seconds long and in-clude metadata-derived captions, visual descriptions, VQA pairs, and reasoning-based MCQs. To address class imbalance, we upsampled Collision and Near-Collision events by 15 × and 2 ×, respectively. For training, we use a curated subset that mixes multiple anno-tation types per clip. The final distribution is summarized in Table 1. 

4.1.2 Training Details 

Model training is performed via SFT, including CoT-SFT. To support high-temporal-fidelity anomaly detection, each video is processed as 180 frames at 30 FPS. The input res-olution is adjusted automatically according to the available GPU memory and token budget. We use the AdamW op-timizer with a learning rate of 1 × 10 −5, a batch size of 8, and weight decay of 0.01. Models are trained for 1 epoch. To handle large model sizes and extended video-text input lengths, we enable BF16 mixed precision, gradient checkpointing, and DeepSpeed ZeRO-3 optimization. All experiments are conducted on a cluster of 32 NVIDIA H100 GPUs. 

4.2. Metrics 

We evaluated performance using per-class Precision ,

Recall and F1-score , with an emphasis on improving these metrics for the minority classes (Collision and Near-Collision). We also assessed overall accuracy and binary anomaly detection accuracy (normal vs. anomalous driv-ing). For our evaluation benchmark, we randomly sample 66 examples from each of the 3 classes from the test set. Precision measures the proportion of correctly predicted positive instances out of all instances predicted as positive, indicating the model’s ability to avoid false positives: Precision = T P T P + F P 

where T P is the number of true positives and F P is the number of false positives. Recall measures the proportion of correctly predicted positive instances out of all actual positive instances, indi-7Table 2. Per-class precision, recall, and F1-score for different models and settings. Model-A includes both zero-shot and fine-tuned performance.                                                               

> Model Collision Near-Collision Normal Driving Accuracy ↑
> Prec. ↑Rec. ↑F1 ↑Prec. ↑Rec. ↑F1 ↑Prec. ↑Rec. ↑F1 ↑
> Cosmos-Reason1 Zero-shot 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.454 0.0075 0.129 0.347 0.984 0.513 35.35 Cosmos-Reason1 Fine-tuned 0.947 0.545 0.692 0.696 0.833 0.758 0.765 0.939 0.843 77.27 NVILA Zero-shot 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.250 0.500 0.333 0.500 0.667 0.571 38.89 NVILA Fine-tuned 0.901 0.696 0.786 0.782 0.924 0.847 0.927 0.969 0.948 86.36

cating the model’s ability to detect all relevant cases: Recall = T P T P + F N 

where F N is the number of false negatives. The F1-score is the harmonic mean of precision and re-call, providing a balanced metric when both false positives and false negatives are important: F1-score = 2 · Precision · Recall Precision + Recall 

Overall accuracy is computed across all three classes combined as: Accuracy =

P3 

> i=1

T P i

N

where T P i is the number of correctly classified samples for class i, and N is the total number of samples across all classes. Since our benchmark includes 66 examples per class from the test set, N = 66 × 3 = 198 .

4.3. Zero-shot Performance 

As anticipated, zero-shot performance for CR1 was very poor, with 0 precision and recall for Collision and Near-Collision detection with reasoning turned off. With rea-soning enabled it still had 0 precision and recall for Col-lision cases but this time could detect some Near-Collision cases with poor precision and recall as depicted in Table 2 .The majority of predictions defaulted to “Normal Driving” regardless. NVILA and Qwen2.5-VL-7B showed similar results with extremely poor Collision and Near-Collision metrics. These poor results show a huge domain gap that can be reduced by post-training these models using domain-specific datasets. 

4.4. Fine-tuning Performance Overview 

We evaluate CR1 and NVILA in both zero-shot and fine-tuned settings. As shown in Table 2, all models exhibit poor zero-shot performance, particularly on the minority classes (Collision, Near-Collision), due to strong bias toward “Nor-mal Driving” predictions. After applying our proposed fine-tuning pipeline, which includes multimodal supervision (MCQs, captions, VQA, and reasoning traces) and class-balanced sampling, all mod-els achieve significant improvements: CR1 achieves 0.947 precision / 0.545 recall for Collision detection and an overall accuracy of 77.27%, correspond-ing to an ≈ +42 improvement over its zero-shot baseline. NVILA-8B, despite lacking a reasoning head, reaches 0.901 precision / 0.696 recall for Collisions and an overall accu-racy of 86.4 %, confirming its strong visual representation quality when paired with our multimodal dataset. We provide detailed ablation analyses in the following sections to isolate the impact of each design choice. 

4.5. Ablation Studies and Key Findings 

Our ablation studies confirmed the importance of several factors related to the frame rate, video resolution, learning rate, video duration, data mixtures.                     

> Table 3. Effect of Frame Rate (FPS)
> FPS F1-scores Overall Accuracy ↑
> C↑NC ↑N↑
> 10.341 0.029 0.536 40.91 15 0.537 0.634 0.733 65.66 30 0.640 0.757 0.849 76.26

4.5.1 Effect of FPS 

We evaluate the effect of temporal resolution by training the model with different frame rates. As shown in Table 3, higher FPS yields substantial gains in per-class F1-scores and overall accuracy. At 1 FPS, the model performs poorly on temporally brief anomalies, especially Near-Collisions, with an overall ac-curacy of only 40.91%. Increasing to 15 FPS significantly improves Near-Collision detection and raises accuracy to 65.66%. At 30 FPS, the model achieves its best perfor-mance, with an overall accuracy of 76.26% and strong F1-scores across all classes. These results confirm that high 8temporal fidelity is critical for detecting short, fine-grained anomalies in real-world driving videos.     

> Table 4. Effect of Model Size.
> Model Size Overall Accuracy ↑
> NVILA-8B 83.83
> NVILA-33B 80.30

4.5.2 Effect of Model Size 

Our experiments reveal that varying the model size between NVILA-8B and NVILA-33B results in negligible differ-ences in overall accuracy (Table 4). In fact, the 8B model slightly outperforms the 33B model (83.83% vs. 80.30%), suggesting that, for the current dataset scale, larger model capacity does not necessarily translate into performance gains. This indicates that the dataset size may be the limit-ing factor, as larger models typically require substantially more training data to realize their full potential. Con-sequently, while both models achieve comparable results, scaling the dataset could enable the 33B model to surpass the smaller variant in future experiments.                     

> Table 5. Effect of learning rate.
> Learning Rate F1-scores Overall Accuracy ↑
> C↑NC ↑N↑
> 1e-06 0.567 0.271 0.674 55.55 2e-05 0.646 0.725 0.802 73.73 1e-05 0.640 0.757 0.849 76.26

4.5.3 Effect of learning rate 

We ablate different learning rates to identify the optimal setting for SFT. As shown in Table 5, both 1 × 10 −5 and 

2 × 10 −5 outperform the lower 1 × 10 −6 baseline by a large margin. The best overall accuracy (76.26%) and strongest F1-scores across most classes are achieved with 1 × 10 −5.This underscores the importance of learning rate tuning, es-pecially for long-tail event classes. 

4.5.4 Effect of Video Duration and Spatial Resolution 

We jointly ablate spatial resolution and video duration to evaluate their effect on driving event classification. As shown in Table 6, both increasing resolution and shortening duration lead to performance gains, up to practical limits imposed by GPU memory and model context size.                           

> Table 6. Impact of Video Duration and Resolution.
> Video Duration Spatial Resolution F1-score ↑Overall Accuracy ↑
> CNC N
> 6 sec 32x4 0.500 0.702 0.820 70.20 6 sec 128x32 0.640 0.757 0.849 76.26 4 sec 128x32 0.672 0.744 0.845 76.26 4 sec 192x48 0.711 0.748 0.857 77.77

Moving from 32 ×4 to 128 ×32 resolution at 6 seconds improves accuracy from 70.20% to 76.26%. Further gains are achieved by shortening the input duration to 4 seconds while increasing resolution to 192 ×48, resulting in the best overall accuracy of 77.77%. These results suggest that higher spatial resolution pro-vides critical fine-grained visual cues, and shorter durations help reduce context dilution, allowing the model to focus more effectively on anomalous frames at higher resolution. 

4.5.5 Effect of Data Mixtures 

A crucial aspect of our post-training framework is the strate-gic use and combination of various supervision signals. Our ablation studies reveal that the composition, scale, and bal-ance of the training data mixture significantly impact model performance.                 

> Table 7. Effect of Data Balancing.
> Data Distribution F1-scores Overall Accuracy ↑
> C↑NC ↑N↑
> Unbalanced 0.00 0.603 0.748 56.57 Balanced 0.640 0.757 0.849 76.26

Impact of Data Balancing The raw Nexar dataset is heavily imbalanced. Fine-tuning on this distribution yields low F1-scores for critical anomaly classes especially Col-lision class (F1 = 0.00) despite moderate performance on Normal Driving (Table 7). To mitigate this, we upsampled Collision and Near-Collision classes by 15 × and 2 × respectively, producing a balanced dataset of ∼68,000 samples. Fine-tuning on this mixture improved overall accuracy by +19.7% and drasti-cally increased F1 for Collision class (from 0.00 to 0.640) and Near-Collisions (from 0.603 to 0.757), confirming that balanced class distributions are essential for anomaly detec-tion. Additionally, our studies showed that a sufficient scale of data is also essential; even with a balanced distribu-9tion, using a very limited number of samples (e.g., 1,000 or 3,000 per class) resulted in a substantial degradation in performance compared to the full 68,000-sample balanced dataset.            

> Table 8. Accuracy for NVILA model with incremental data inclu-sion.
> Model MCQ Caption VQA Accuracy ↑
> NVILA
> ✓80.30
> ✓✓83.83
> ✓✓✓86.36

Contribution of Caption Augmentations We evaluated the impact of incorporating various captioning data on model performance: • Metadata-Derived Captions: Using the structured captions generated from Nexar metadata proved ef-fective in providing the model with concrete, factual information about the driving scenario. This helped ground the VLM’s understanding of key details like weather, impact side, and vehicle roles, leading to im-proved classification accuracy, particularly for Near-Collision and Collision events. • VLM-Generated Captions: The addition of Gemini-generated captions, which offer more free-form, de-scriptive summaries, further enhanced the model’s per-formance. By exposing the model to more natural lan-guage descriptions of the same event, we observed im-provements in its ability to generalize to new, unseen scenarios. Our experiments showed that a subset of ap-proximately 10,000 Gemini captions yielded the best results when combined with other data types, suggest-ing a sweet spot for data diversity without introducing noise. As shown in Table 8, adding captions increased NVILA’s accuracy from 80.30% (MCQ only) to 83.83%. 

Impact of Question-Answering Data. VQA supervi-sion, generated from detailed metadata captions, enhanced the model’s ability to reason about situational and causal elements. NVILA’s accuracy increased from 83.83% to 86.36% when VQA was added (Table 8). These structured Q&A examples prompt the model to infer blame, event type, and intent, contributing to more accurate and inter-pretable classifications. 

Role of Reasoning and Think Trace Data We design two distinct forms of reasoning supervision to preserve and enhance the model’s chain-of-thought (CoT) capabil-ities during fine-tuning: (i) Reasoning MCQs that target our classification task, and (ii) Reasoning-VQA that elicit general scene understanding through open-ended question-answering. • Reasoning MCQs (Classification-Targeted): For each driving clip, we prompt DeepSeek-R1 with our standard 3-way MCQ along with structured and VLM-generated captions to generate a step-by-step reason-ing trace and final answer. If the predicted label matches the ground truth, the explanation between 

<think> tokens is retained as a valid reasoning trace for CoT SFT. To evaluate the impact of reasoning scale and due to limited reasoning data, we double the amount of Rea-soning MCQ data during SFT. • Reasoning VQA (Open-Ended Reasoning): We also generate challenging, open-ended VQA prompts that require causal, temporal, or spatial reasoning. For each example, we ask DeepSeek-R1 to generate a question, correct answer, and a think trace justification triplet, using both structured and VLM captions as input. 

Results. As shown in Table 9, adding Reasoning MCQs to the base model improves classification accuracy slightly (74.75% → 75.25%) but, more importantly, restores the model’s ability to generate coherent reasoning traces. We evaluate reasoning-mode accuracy by prompting the model to answer with step-by-step reasoning followed by a final answer . In contrast, the standard classifica-tion setting prompts for a direct answer without reason-ing. Before adding CoT supervision, the model fails to respond with reasoning traces, even when prompted, in-dicating catastrophic forgetting of its pretrained CoT abil-ities. Adding Reasoning MCQs enables the model to re-cover reasoning-mode accuracy (52.75%) and improves in-terpretability. Doubling the Reasoning MCQ data (×2) in-creases reasoning accuracy to 61.11%. Finally, combining Reasoning MCQ with open-ended Reasoning-VQA super-vision yields the best results: 77.27% classification accu-racy and 63.13% accuracy (with reasoning enabled during inference). These findings show that explicit CoT supervision not only improves classification performance but also enables robust and interpretable reasoning in downstream inference. While reasoning-mode accuracy improves significantly with CoT supervision, it does not yet surpass classification accuracy. This is likely due to limited scale and diversity in the reasoning supervision, which may cause the model to overfit to the classification objective. We leave the devel-opment of larger and more robust reasoning datasets, along 10 Table 9. Effect of Chain-of-Thought Reasoning Supervision. Reasoning MCQs target classification alignment; Reason×2 doubles that data; Reason-VQA enables open-ended scene reasoning. Combining both yields the highest classification and reasoning-mode perfor-mance. 

Model MCQ Caption VQA Reasoning MCQ Reasoning MCQ x2 Reasoning VQA Accuracy (Reasoning Off ✗)Accuracy (Reasoning On ✓)CR1 

✓ ✓ ✓ - - - 74.75 n/a 

✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - - 75.25 52.75 

✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - 73.73 61.11 

✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 77.27 63.13 

with refined CoT prompting pipelines, as future work to fur-ther improve reasoning-mode generalization. 

4.5.6 Final Results 

Our best-performing model for CR1 is fine-tuned with a combination of MCQs, structured and LLM-generated cap-tions, VQA pairs, and two forms of chain-of-thought super-vision: classification-aligned Reasoning MCQs and open-ended Reasoning VQA. This model achieves an overall classification accuracy of 

77.27% and a reasoning-mode accuracy of 63.13% when prompted to generate think traces during inference (Ta-ble 9). It also yields strong per-class F1-scores of 0.69 (Col-lision), 0.758 (Near-Collision), and 0.843 (Normal Driv-ing), demonstrating robust performance across the full spec-trum of driving events. These results represent a significant improvement over models trained with standard classification data alone, highlighting the importance of multimodal and reasoning-aligned supervision in post-training large VLMs for safety-critical tasks. For comparison, NVILA-8B, a non-reasoning model, achieved the highest overall classification accuracy (86.4 %) when fine-tuned on the same multimodal dataset with-out reasoning supervision. Since NVILA lacks a chain-of-thought head, we restricted its training to MCQ, caption, and VQA supervision only. This comparison underscores the complementarity between reasoning-rich models (CR1) and efficient non-reasoning architectures (NVILA), the for-mer excelling in interpretability and causal reasoning, the latter in pure classification efficiency. 

5. Discussion 

The substantial improvement in performance from near-zero for zero-shot to high classification and reasoning accu-racy demonstrates the value of post-training VLMs for real-world tasks like anomalous driving behavior detection. This work highlights a promising direction for adapting general-purpose VLMs to safety-critical domains. This framework bridges vision-language understanding and embodied rea-soning, aligning with the emerging paradigm of physical AI and world foundation models for real-world autonomy. 

5.1. Limitations and Future Work 

Despite these gains, several limitations remain, particu-larly in terms of generalization and reasoning fidelity. We outline key areas for improvement below. 

5.1.1 Instruction Following and Scene Understanding 

Training exclusively on MCQ classification tasks was found to reduce the model’s ability to follow open-ended instruc-tions, such as captioning or question answering. To pre-serve general-purpose capabilities while maintaining strong classification performance, we propose the following aug-mentations: • Short QA Generation (LLaMA-3.1-70B): 

To enhance instruction following and generate open-ended short QA, detailed, metadata-derived captions can serve as input to LLaMA-3.1-70B [5] for gener-ating short question-answer pairs, capturing essential scene and incident details, such as vehicle role, mo-tion, impact side, and weather. These can help pre-serve generic scene understanding of the model to un-derstand important questions about the driving scenar-ios for better generalization. • Augmented Caption Generation: In addition to structured captions, we can use LLaMA-3.1-70B to generate varied, descriptive augmentations that intro-duce linguistic diversity. This enables richer natu-ral language exposure during fine-tuning and supports better downstream generalization. 

5.1.2 Causal Reasoning and Think Trace Generation 

While adding CoT reasoning data substantially improved reasoning-mode performance, a gap still remains between classification and reasoning accuracy. We attribute this to 11 both scale limitations and data quality bottlenecks. To fur-ther improve CoT performance, we propose: • Improved Think Trace Quality: Currently, only 

∼33% of reasoning VQA samples result in valid think traces where the LLM’s predicted answer matches the ground truth. For the remaining samples, we discard the trace. We plan to address this by training/prompt-engineering a secondary LLM to revise and align in-correct traces using structured captions, ground truth labels, and generated reasoning as inputs. • External Reasoning Datasets: To improve generic physical reasoning beyond our task-specific data, we will integrate broader sources such as the understand-ing and reasoning subsets of the Physical Common Sense VQA dataset used in CR1 fine-tuning. • Reinforcement Learning after CoT Fine-Tuning: 

Inspired by the RL stage in CR1 and recent Long-RL strategies, we plan to explore reinforcement learning after CoT supervised fine-tuning. This could help fur-ther stabilize reasoning trace generation, align reason-ing quality with downstream performance, and miti-gate overfitting to static supervision data. 

5.1.3 Expansion and Generalization 

In future work, we plan to: • Explore a broader range of driving behaviors (e.g., red-light violations, stop-sign infractions). • Experiment with additional model architectures and hyperparameter tuning. • Evaluate in simulated or closed-loop driving environ-ments for policy transfer. These improvements aim to further enhance the rea-soning ability, instruction-following robustness, and down-stream safety of post-trained VLMs for autonomous sys-tems. 

5.1.4 Ethical Considerations 

VLM-AutoDrive is designed to enhance interpretability and safety analysis, not to replace human judgment. We ac-knowledge potential dataset biases and privacy risks inher-ent in real-world dashcam data and emphasize transparent, auditable reasoning outputs to promote responsible deploy-ment in automotive applications. 

6. Conclusion 

This paper presents a modular post-training framework for adapting general-purpose VLMs to detect safety-critical driving events from real-world dashcam footage. Zero-shot evaluations showed that pretrained models like NVIDIA’s CR1 perform poorly on long-tail events, heavily favoring “Normal Driving” predictions. Our solution integrates a scalable data pipeline that syn-thesizes diverse supervision signals, including metadata-derived captions, LLM-generated visual descriptions, VQA pairs, and chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning prompts with think traces. These annotations are used for supervised fine-tuning. Experiments on Nexar dashcam videos demonstrate sub-stantial gains in classification and reasoning accuracy. For example, fine-tuning CR1 improved Collision detection precision from 0.0 to 0.947 and recall from 0.0 to 0.545. Near-Collision detection also improved significantly, with precision and recall reaching 0.696 and 0.833, respectively. Binary anomaly detection accuracy reached 87.9% .Our ablations underscore the importance of high frame rates (30 FPS), fine spatial resolution, and a balanced data mixture that includes both structured and reasoning-rich su-pervision. The modularity of the VLM-AutoDrive pipeline also enables extensibility to new event types, making it a practical foundation for deploying VLMs in safety-critical automotive systems. We hope VLM-AutoDrive serves as a foundation for reasoning-centric perception systems that can extend to broader physical reasoning domains beyond driving. 

Acknowledgments 

We acknowledge Nexar for providing access to commer-cially licensed driving data used in this study. The data was obtained through a paid license. All methodology, analysis, and conclusions in this work were developed internally by NVIDIA. We also thank Will Kim and Ekram Mukbil for assistance with data access and internal coordination. 

References    

> [1] J. Bai, S. Bai, S. Yang, S. Wang, S. Tan, P. Wang, J. Lin, C. Zhou, and J. Zhou. Qwen-vl: A versatile vision-language model for understanding, localization, text reading, and be-yond. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12966 , 2023. [2] Y. Chen, W. Huang, B. Shi, Q. Hu, H. Ye, L. Zhu, Z. Liu, P. Molchanov, J. Kautz, X. Qi, S. Liu, H. Yin, Y. Lu, and S. Han. Scaling rl to long videos, 2025. [3] DeepSeek-AI. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capa-bility in llms via reinforcement learning, 2025. [4] Gemini Team. Gemini: A family of highly capable multi-modal models, 2023.

12 [5] A. Grattafiori, A. Dubey, A. Jauhri, A. Pandey, A. Kadian, et al. The llama 3 herd of models, 2024. [6] S. Haresh, S. Kumar, M. Z. Zia, and Q.-H. Tran. Towards anomaly detection in dashcam videos, 2020. [7] J. Jiang, X. Li, Z. Liu, M. Li, G. Chen, Z. Li, D.-A. Huang, G. Liu, Z. Yu, K. Keutzer, S. Ahn, J. Kautz, H. Yin, Y. Lu, S. Han, and W. Byeon. Token-efficient long video under-standing for multimodal llms, 2025. [8] H. Liu, C. Li, Y. Li, B. Li, Y. Zhang, S. Shen, and Y. J. Lee. Llava-next: Improved reasoning, ocr, and world knowledge, January 2024. [9] Z. Liu, L. Zhu, B. Shi, Z. Zhang, Y. Lou, S. Yang, H. Xi, S. Cao, Y. Gu, D. Li, X. Li, Y. Fang, Y. Chen, C.-Y. Hsieh, D.-A. Huang, A.-C. Cheng, V. Nath, J. Hu, S. Liu, R. Kr-ishna, D. Xu, X. Wang, P. Molchanov, J. Kautz, H. Yin, S. Han, and Y. Lu. Nvila: Efficient frontier visual language models, 2025. [10] S. Malla, C. Choi, I. Dwivedi, J. H. Choi, and J. Li. Drama: Joint risk localization and captioning in driving, 2022. [11] J. Mao, Y. Qian, J. Ye, H. Zhao, and Y. Wang. Gpt-driver: Learning to drive with gpt, 2023. [12] D. C. Moura, S. Zhu, and O. Zvitia. Nexar dashcam collision prediction dataset and challenge, 2025. [13] NVIDIA, N. Agarwal, A. Ali, et al. Cosmos world founda-tion model platform for physical ai, 2025. [14] NVIDIA, A. Azzolini, J. Bai, H. Brandon, J. Cao, P. Chat-topadhyay, H. Chen, J. Chu, Y. Cui, J. Diamond, Y. Ding, L. Feng, F. Ferroni, R. Govindaraju, J. Gu, S. Gururani, I. E. Hanafi, Z. Hao, J. Huffman, J. Jin, B. Johnson, R. Khan, G. Kurian, E. Lantz, N. Lee, Z. Li, X. Li, M. Liao, T.-Y. Lin, Y.-C. Lin, M.-Y. Liu, X. Lu, A. Luo, A. Mathau, Y. Ni, L. Pavao, W. Ping, D. W. Romero, M. Smelyanskiy, S. Song, L. Tchapmi, A. Z. Wang, B. Wang, H. Wang, F. Wei, J. Xu, Y. Xu, D. Yang, X. Yang, Z. Yang, J. Zhang, X. Zeng, and Z. Zhang. Cosmos-reason1: From physical common sense to embodied reasoning, 2025. [15] OpenAI, J. Achiam, S. Adler, S. Agarwal, L. Ahmad, et al. Gpt-4 technical report, 2024. [16] X. Tian, J. Gu, B. Li, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, Z. Zhao, K. Zhan, P. Jia, X. Lang, and H. Zhao. Drivevlm: The convergence of autonomous driving and large vision-language models, 2024. [17] K. Winter, M. Azer, and F. B. Flohr. Bevdriver: Leveraging bev maps in llms for robust closed-loop driving, 2025. [18] G. Xu, P. Jin, H. Li, Y. Song, L. Sun, and L. Yuan. Llava-cot: Let vision language models reason step-by-step, 2024. [19] R. Zhao, Q. Yuan, J. Li, H. Hu, Y. Li, C. Zheng, and F. Gao. Sce2drivex: A generalized mllm framework for scene-to-drive learning, 2025. [20] J. Zhu, W. Wang, Z. Chen, Z. Liu, S. Ye, L. Gu, H. Tian, Y. Duan, W. Su, J. Shao, Z. Gao, E. Cui, X. Wang, Y. Cao, Y. Liu, X. Wei, H. Zhang, H. Wang, W. Xu, H. Li, J. Wang, N. Deng, S. Li, Y. He, T. Jiang, J. Luo, Y. Wang, C. He, B. Shi, X. Zhang, W. Shao, J. He, Y. Xiong, W. Qu, P. Sun, P. Jiao, H. Lv, L. Wu, K. Zhang, H. Deng, J. Ge, K. Chen, L. Wang, M. Dou, L. Lu, X. Zhu, T. Lu, D. Lin, Y. Qiao, J. Dai, and W. Wang. Internvl3: Exploring advanced train-ing and test-time recipes for open-source multimodal mod-els, 2025. 

13 A. Appendix 

A.1. Understanding VQA Generation. You are an AI visual assistant watching a single video . A detailed description summarizing the visual content of the video is provided to you . Assume that you are 

watching the video directly — not reading a textual description — and generate questions based on what you "see" . Your task is to create multiple -choice question 

triplets (Question, Options, Answer) that reflect a deep understanding of the video content .

Objectives :

- Encourage comprehensive reasoning about the scene .

- Cover diverse aspects (e .g., actions, context, causality, attribution, environment) .

- Reflect visual details and metadata faithfully — do not invent content not present in the description .

Focus Areas (Dimensions to Cover) :

Your questions must cover at least 5–7 different dimensions, such as :

- Weather, visibility, light conditions 

- Road and environmental conditions 

- Motion behavior of ego and third -party vehicles 

- Impact sides of involved vehicles 

- Blame assessment (driver, road, third party) 

- Pedestrian or cyclist actions 

- Vehicle roles and types 

- Scene context (e .g., traffic density, zone, location) 

Mandatory Dimension :

- You must **always include one question** that asks whether the event depicted is a **collision**, **near collision**, or **normal driving** .

- This question should also attempt to infer **why** the event was categorized as such, based on visual details in the description (e .g., sudden braking, vehicle 

contact, evasive maneuvers, etc .).

Guidelines for generating Question -Answer Triplets :

- Generate 5 to 7 high -quality question -option -answer triplets .

- Each question should cover a distinct dimension of the scene .

- Each question should have 3 to 4 options (labeled A, B, C, D) .

- Only one correct answer per question . Provide it as a single letter (e .g., "A") .

- Do not copy the exact wording from the description . Paraphrase naturally as if interpreting visual information .

Output Format :

Return a Python dictionary string in the following JSON structure :

[{ 

"Dimension" : "<dimension -1>", 

"Question" : "<question -1>", 

"Options" : "A .XXX \nB .XXX \nC .XXX \nD .XXX ", 

"Answer" : "<A/B/C/D>" 

}, 

]

{structured_caption }

Question -Answering Augmentation Generation Prompt 

Figure A.1. Prompt used to generate understanding VQA from LLaMA3.1-70B for enhancing generic event understanding capability, given programmatically generated structured-captions as input. 

14 A.2. Reasoning VQA Generation. You are a highly intelligent reasoning model. Your task is to watch a video from the perspective of a vehicle's dashcam. Base d o n the following captions for a video, 

generate a challenging multiple -choice question that requires **multiple reasoning steps** and deep understanding to answer. 

The question should involve as many logical steps as possible, ensuring that the answer cannot be deduced without careful ana lys is of the captions. 

Provide the question with four options (A, B, C, D), clearly indicating the correct answer, and include detailed reasoning. E nsu re you answer the question as if you 

are directly watching the video and include detailed reasoning: 

The question should be related to Goal and Intention Reasoning and should focus on the driving event. 

Note : Respond as if you're directly observing the video. Infer details like responsibility, environment, and impact areas natural ly from the scene. Do not use 

phrases like 'blame assessment' or refer to any metadata explicitly. 

Here is everything you observe from the video: 

{structured_caption }

{vlm_caption }

Output format: 

QUESTION: <Your question> 

OPTIONS: 

A. <Option A> 

B. <Option B> 

C. <Option C> 

D. <Option D> 

ANSWER: <Correct answer (e.g., A, B, C, or D)> 

REASONS: 

##### 

- <Reason 1> 

- <Reason 2> 

- <Reason 3> 

- <Reason 4> 

- <Reason 5> 

##### (Add as many steps as needed.) 

Reasoning VQA Generation Prompt 

Figure A.2. Prompt used to generate reasoning VQA from DeepSeek-R1 for enhancing generic reasoning capability, given programmati-cally generated structured-captions and VLM generated scene description as inputs. 

15 A.3. Thinking Trace Generation. You are a highly intelligent reasoning model. Your task is to watch a video from the perspective of a vehicle's dashcam and d ete rmine what type of driving event 

occurs. 

This is the video you see: 

{structured_caption }

{vlm_caption }

Note : Respond as if you're directly observing the video. Infer details like responsibility, environment, and impact areas natural ly from the scene. Do not use 

phrases like 'blame assessment' or refer to any metadata explicitly. Do not mention that you are reading the description but rat her that you are directly observing 

the video. 

Based on your observation of the video, answer the following question as if you are directly watching the video: 

In this video, the ego vehicle's dashcam captures a driving event. What type of driving event occurs? 

A. The vehicle collides with another vehicle or object. 

B. The vehicle drives normally with no incident. 

C. The vehicle nearly collides but avoids an accident. 

ANSWER: <Output the correct answer (A, B, or C)> 

Think -Trace Generation Prompt 

Figure A.3. Prompt used to generate thinking traces from DeepSeek-R1, given programmatically generated structured-captions, VLM generated scene description and MCQ as inputs. 

16