Title: PA3: Policy-Aware Agent Alignment through Chain-of-Thought

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.14602v2

Published Time: Tue, 24 Mar 2026 00:57:36 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# PA 3: Policy-Aware Agent Alignment through Chain-of-Thought 

Shubhashis Roy Dipta *1, Daniel Bi´ s2, Kun Zhou 2, Lichao Wang 2,Benjamin Yao 2, Chenlei Guo 2, Ruhi Sarikaya 21University of Maryland, Baltimore County 2Amazon Alexa AI 

Correspondence: sroydip1@umbc.edu 

Abstract 

Conversational assistants powered by large language models (LLMs) excel at tool-use tasks but struggle with adhering to complex, business-specific rules. While models can rea-son over business rules provided in context, including all policies for every query intro-duces high latency and wastes compute. Fur-thermore, these lengthy prompts lead to long contexts, harming overall performance due to the ‘needle-in-the-haystack’ problem. To ad-dress these challenges, we propose a multi-stage alignment method that teaches models to recall and apply relevant business policies during chain-of-thought reasoning at inference time, without including the full business policy in-context . Furthermore, we introduce a novel 

Policy Recall reward based on the Jaccard score and a Hallucination Penalty for GRPO train-ing. Altogether, our best model outperforms the baseline by 16 points and surpasses compa-rable in-context baselines of similar model size by 3 points , while using 40% fewer words .1

1 Introduction 

Different businesses implement different business policies. For example, one e-commerce platform can provide a 30-day return window, while the other might offer only 15 days. Such variation makes developing a single agent model infeasi-ble. While traditional methods, as described on the left of Fig. 1, focus on providing in-context busi-ness policies, the business policies can range from 10k to 90k tokens, which can significantly increase costs, latency and throughput. τ -Bench (Yao et al., 2024), a policy-based tool-calling benchmark, has shown that 95% of inference costs come from input tokens, with only 5% from output. In this work, we explore whether we can eliminate all business poli-cies from in-context by teaching models to recall 

> *

Work done during an internship at Amazon Alexa AI 

> 1

We will release code, data, and models upon acceptance. ## Retail Agent Policy :  

> As a retail agent, you can help users purchase, modify or return orders. …
> →You can return up to 30 days after purchase
> …
> … Please return the iPad mini that I bought last year.
> Our return policy doesn’t allow that
> <reasoning> Okay, the user wants to add one extra bag. The policy states that “ Return can be initiated in 30 days of purchase ”, so…
> … Please return the iPad mini that I bought last year.
> ## Retail Agent Policy :
> Respond in the following format: <reasoning>reasoning process here</reasoning>final response here
> Traditional Method Our Method
> 🤔
> ϫ~10K Tokens
> ͽ~150 Tokens
> ѝ<50 Tokens

Figure 1: While traditional policy-adherence agents need in-context business policies which can range from 

10k to 90k tokens , our method only recalls the relevant policies. For each request, the relevant policies can extend up to 150-400 tokens , which uses up to 225x fewer tokens than the traditional method. 

business policies during inference. As illustrated on the right of Fig. 1, we show that our aligned model recalls ONLY the relevant policies during its reasoning, and adheres to them. For each assis-tant turn, the number of relevant policies can be as low as 0 (e.g., a final “Thank You”), and in most cases at most 1-5 policies, for example, the agent only needs the return-policy to initiate a return. By removing the full business policy from in-context, our method reduces the total number of words by 40%. Finally, we propose a structured alignment recipe, adaptable to new business domains with explicit policy documents .Specifically, our model learns the business poli-cies through reasoning steps and later during infer-ence, recall only the relevant business policies. For any given conversation history and business pol-icy document, first, we generate chain-of-thought targeted to relevant business policies through an evaluation-filtering cycle. Next, we use those CoT traces with multistage training and teach the model to recall the relevant policies during inference and adhere to those. Guan et al. (2025) showed that safety knowledge can be injected through CoT traces. However, their method assumes that they 1

> arXiv:2603.14602v2 [cs.CL] 21 Mar 2026

have access to high-quality CoTs, whereas our method generates those high-quality CoT through a novel evaluation-filtering cycle, hence it can be extended to any business use case. We have shown that this evaluation-filtering cycle during CoT generation improves the model’s recall capa-bility. Additionally, our method is trained with a novel policy-recall reward that reduces hallucina-tions while encouraging shorter and more focused policy recalls. To sum up, • We proposed a generate-branch-evaluate-refine-based method to extract and filter Com-plete and Reliable CoTs automatically, and is designed to be adaptable to other domains with explicit written policies. • We have proposed a novel policy-recall-based reward and hallucination-based penalty for training policy-adherent agents. • Our best model shows 16 points improve-ment over the no-business-policy baseline and 

3 points improvement over the in-context business-policy baseline while using 40% fewer words .

2 Related Work 

2.1 Function Calling Dataset 

Many datasets have been proposed for training and evaluating function-calling capabilities. Recently, Yao et al. (2024) developed τ -Bench evaluation benchmark based on multi-domain business pol-icy. Later, Prabhakar et al. (2025) extended the 

τ -Bench to a train dataset, using the idea of Liu et al. (2024). Yan et al. (2024); Schick et al. (2023) have also developed different multi-turn, multi-step evaluation dataset but lacks business policy which is relevant to the real-life use cases. Recently, Acik-goz et al. (2025) have published a mix of function calling and intent detection dataset. 

2.2 Prompt Compression 

Prior work has extensively explored compressing Chain-of-Thought (CoT) to reduce latency and gen-eration costs (Gu et al., 2025a; Su et al., 2025; Li et al., 2023; Guo et al., 2023). Cheng and Durme (2024) learn compressed, continuous latent embed-dings that are much shorter than the original CoT tokens, while Su et al. (2025) use VQ-VAE to map reasoning paths to discrete latent tokens and then train models on downstream tasks using those to-kens. In contrast, our method focuses on compress-ing the system prompt rather than the reasoning path. During inference, it recalls only a small set of relevant policies from long policy documents, thereby shortening the policy context. 

2.3 Chain-of-Thought Evaluation 

Although there has been relatively little work on CoT evaluation itself, there is extensive research on evaluating generated text. Fu et al. (2024a,b) have shown how LLMs can be used as a judge for the generative text. Later, Chiang and Lee (2023) have shown that this idea can be extended and can be improved using an analysis-based prompting rather than direct scoring. Wang et al. (2024b) have shown that LLMs are neither consistent nor fair evaluators but provided recipes to overcome that inconsistency. Recently, Saha et al. (2024) and Li et al. (2025) have provided a decomposition and aggregation based evaluation which outperformed the previous works. Wang et al. (2024a); Lee et al. (2024); Hong et al. (2024); Kargupta et al. (2025); Ranaldi and Freitas (2024) have shown that generat-ing multiple reasoning paths from the same model and aggregating them can substantially improve performance. Our method draws inspiration from these works but focuses on evaluating intermediate reasoning steps using various rubrics. 

2.4 Verifiable Rewards in GRPO 

To address the high computational cost asso-ciated with early reinforcement learning algo-rithms (Ouyang et al., 2022) such as PPO (Schul-man et al., 2017), Shao et al. (2024) introduced Group-Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO), a lightweight RL framework that has achieved strong alignment performance across multiple domains, including mathematical reasoning (Shao et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2025) and general reasoning tasks (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025; Zheng et al., 2025). GRPO is paired with correctness-based rewards or LLM-as-a-judge scoring (Gu et al., 2025b). More recently, GRPO has been adapted to a broader set of domains through domain-specific, verifiable re-ward formulations. For example, Qian et al. (2025) employ function-matching scores as rewards for training tool-calling LLMs, He et al. (2025) com-bine final verification accuracy with retrieval met-rics to improve claim verification, and Tennant et al. (2025) incorporate human moral values directly into the reward function to align ethical behavior. 2Our work extends this line of verifiable reward de-sign by introducing a novel policy-recall metric that rewards correct policy recall while penalizing incorrect or hallucinated policy recalls, enabling more faithful and policy-grounded reasoning. 

3 Method 

We propose a two-stage training recipe: (1) Gen-erating High-Quality Chain-of-Thought (§3.1) (2) Multi-Stage training using the CoT data (§3.2). 

3.1 Chain-of-Thought 

Unlike the traditional Chain-of-Thought (CoT) that thinks step by step, we want our CoTs to recall only the relevant policies that are related to the user request and adhere to those policies during the final response. With that in mind, we use a 

generate-branch-evaluate-refine – a 4 stage cy-cle to create our policy-based CoTs. The whole pipeline is shown in Fig. 2. 

3.1.1 Stage 1: Generate 

For each assistant or tool turn, we prompt an LLM to generate the CoT. Specifically, given the business policy, and the whole user-assistant conversation up to that turn, we prompt the model to generate the CoT only for the last user-assistant turn. We provide the full conversation as in some cases it might be necessary to get the context, i.e., the user has already provided the user ID and the agent does not need the policy to “ask for user ID” again. Unless specified otherwise, we use deepseek-r1 

to generate the CoTs. 

3.1.2 Stage 2: Rubrics 

While one trivial approach would be to just trust the LLM and take the CoT as generated, there is a high risk of noise, i.e., made-up policy, non-relevant policy, or missing out important-relevant policy. Inspired by the previous works (Saha et al., 2024; Lanham et al., 2023), we branch the evaluation space into 4 different evaluator agents. We identify four core rubrics of the expected CoTs: Atomicity, Completeness, Faithfulness, Style. 

Completeness: The CoT must include all poli-cies that are relevant to satisfying the user request. 

Atomicity: The CoT must be concise such that it does not include irrelevant policies. 

Faithfulness: The CoT must not mention any-thing that is not explicitly stated on the policy. 

Style: The CoT should have a thinking narrative style rather than just extraction from the document. 

3.1.3 Stage 3: Evaluate 

We prompt each of the evaluators to score depend-ing on their own properties as described above. Following Stureborg et al. (2024); Chiang and Lee (2023), we use a “analyze-rate” prompting with 1-10 scale for scoring. We use Claude-3.5-v1 as the evaluator unless otherwise specified. We hand-engineer the thresholds based on the principle that 

Faithfulness is the most important property , fol-lowed in order by Completeness, Atomicity, and Style. Accordingly, Faithfulness requires a per-fect score of 10, while the remaining rubrics use progressively lower thresholds (details in App. A). A CoT must satisfy all thresholds simultaneously; otherwise, it is sent to the refinement stage. 

3.1.4 Stage 4: Refinement: 

The CoTs that have not passed the thresholds are sent to a summarizer agent which summarizes what the CoT Generator has done right and what it has done wrong. This concise summary goes to the CoT Generator again to refine the previous CoT based on the evaluation summary. We attempt at most four refinement rounds, as we have seen di-minishing returns after that (Fig. 4). If not found by then, we remove that data point entirely. Prompts for the CoT generation are provided in §F.2. 

3.2 Multi-Stage Training 

We use a three-stage training to inject the business knowledge into the parametric knowledge of the LLM. We use the Qwen2.5-Instruct-32B as our base model. A high level overview of the multi-stage training framework is shown on Table 7. 

Stage 1: Continual-SFT 

In the first stage, we use a mix of general func-tion calling dataset and business-policy in-context dataset to fine-tune the base model. The main goal of this stage was to improve the general function calling capability and train on the business-policy-adherent tool calling. For the business-policy based function-calling dataset, we keep the business pol-icy in-context for this stage. We refer to the result-ing model as PA 1.

Stage 2: CoT Augmented SFT 

In the next stage, we use the final checkpoint from the stage 1 as the base model and we continue fine-tuning using the CoT-augmented business-policy dataset. This dataset was synthetically generated using the CoT extraction pipeline (§3.1). This 3CoT Generate  

> Rubrics
> Evaluate ?
> Refine : Generate Error Summary
> Yes
> Final CoT
> No
> Complete? Faithful?
> Atomic? Style?

Figure 2: Overview of our multi-stage CoT refinement loop, consisting of Generation, Rubric Evaluation, CoT Evaluation, Targeted Refinement. Generated Policy Extractor    

> Agent Generated Thinking Block
> Recalled Policies (B)
> Business Policy
> Hallucinated Policies (C)
> Business Policy
> Required Policies (A)
> Required Policy Extractor
> 1. Refund 2. # of Passenger …3. Cancel
> User Request
> 1. Refund 2. # of Passenger …5. Member status
> 1. Number of baggage
> Reward Recall Penalty Hallucination

Figure 3: Overview of the proposed Policy Recall re-ward, consisting of a policy-recall–based reward and a hallucination-based penalty. 

dataset contains the same trajectories as those used in Stage 1. However, unlike Stage 1, we removed the business policies to encourage the model to re-call policies within the reasoning (thinking) block. The resulting model is referred to as PA 2.

Stage 3: Reinforcement Learning with GRPO 

In the final stage, we employ GRPO (Shao et al., 2024) to reinforce the model’s adherence to the re-quired output format and recall policies with high precision. This stage uses 900 unseen assistant turns that were not included in earlier phases. Fol-lowing Qian et al. (2025), we train the model on every assistant and tool-calling turn. We incorpo-rate five distinct rewards and penalties to guide the model’s behavior. We refer to the resulting model as PA 3.

Correct Policy Reward: We introduce the Pol-icyRecall reward, which rewards generated CoTs to recall the correct and relevant policies while pe-nalizing over-recall. Given the ground-truth policy document and the current generation, an LLM (i.e., 

Qwen3-32B ) first extracts the set of policies ( A) re-quired to satisfy the user request (prompt in F.9). We then use the same LLM to extract the set of poli-cies ( B) referenced in the agent’s thinking block (prompt in F.10). However, RL training is highly susceptible to reward hacking (Gao et al., 2023; Tennant et al., 2025; Dipta et al., 2026; Nazi et al., 2026), where the model may over-optimize the re-ward, i.e., by recalling all policies – thus defeating the intended objective. To mitigate this, we employ the Jaccard score J as a proxy reward. 

Rpolicy = J (A, B ) = |A ∩ B||A ∪ B| ∈ [0 , 1] 

The Jaccard score penalizes over-recall while re-warding accurate and relevant policy recall. Specif-ically, as the model retrieves additional irrelevant policies, the denominator A ∪ B increases, caus-ing the score to decrease and thereby discouraging unnecessary recalls. 

Hallucinated Policy Penalty: Next, we intro-duce the HallucinationPenalty , which penalizes the model whenever a policy is mentioned that does not appear in the ground-truth document. Specifically, we use the same LLM to extract the set of policies (C) that are referenced in the model’s reasoning but absent from the policy document (prompt in F.11). We then apply the following equation to impose the penalty. 

Phallucination = |C||B| + |C| ∈ [0 , 1] 

Here, B and C are disjoint sets of recalled and hallucinated policies, respectively. |B|+|C| equals the total number of mentioned policies. Both of the above scoring methods, with exam-ples, are illustrated on Fig. 3. 

Policy Recall Length Penalty: In early experi-ments, we observed that the model often produced excessively long CoTs that repeatedly checked the same policies. We hypothesize that this behavior comes from pretraining on math-reasoning datasets where repeated verification is beneficial; in our setting, however, it only increases cost without improving accuracy. To mitigate that, inspired by overlong punishment from DAPO (Yu et al., 2025), we have adopted the same length penalty but only for the CoT block. We set Lsof t = 100 

and Lhard = 250 .

Ppolicy_len =



0, |y| ≤ Lsof t  

> (|y|− Lsof t )
> Lhard −Lsof t

, Lsof t < |y| ≤ Lhard 

1, Lhard < |y|

4Agent Model Pass@1 ↑ Mean                                                  

> τ-Airline τ-Retail Avg. Words ↓
> Full Business Policy In-Context
> Claude 3.5 Sonnet 48.05 69.54 59.35 -Claude 3.7 Sonnet 44.05 80.20 62.12 -Claude 4 Sonnet 50.70 68.00 59.25 -GLM-4.5-Air 54.45 75.37 64.91 42k GLM-4.5 55.35 79.50 67.42 40.3k xLAM-2-32b 37.35 63.70 50.52 45k Qwen-2.5-32B 27.95 58.04 43.00 39k
> Without Business Policy
> xLAM-2-32b 17.40 58.41 37.91 29.7k
> PA 117.15 58.72 37.93 30k
> PA 236.95 63.07 50.01 45k
> PA 342.00 65.51 53.75 27k

Table 1: Success Rate ( pass @1 ) and Mean number of words in a trajectory for various proprietary, open-source, and our fine-tuned models on the Retail and Airline domain of τ -Bench (averaged over 5 trials). Overall denotes the average performance across both domains. PA 1, PA 2, and PA 3 corre-spond to Stage 1, Stage 2, and Stage 3 training, respectively. 

Turn Reward: For the tool call turn, follow-ing Qian et al. (2025), we use a combination of tool name, parameter name and parameter content matching as the reward score. For the assistant turn, we use Qwen3-32B-thinking to score the genera-tion based on the ground truth response. Details on both of the scores are presented in §D.             

> Rturn =
> 
> RM (G, P )∈[−3,3] if assistant
> Rtool _correct ∈[−3,3] if tool-call

where RM (G, P ) denotes the score assigned by the reward model given the ground-truth re-sponse G and the predicted response P . The term 

Rtool _correct includes rname , rparam , and rvalue –the rewards associated with correctly generating the function name, function parameters, and func-tion values, respectively. 

Format Reward: Lastly, we use a binary (0/1) reward based on the specified format (see F.13). Finally we combine all the scores to get the final reward, 

Rf inal = Rf ormat + Rturn + Rpolicy 

− P hallucination − P policy _len ∈ [−4, 5] 

4 Experiment 

4.1 Training Dataset 

For training, we use the general function-calling dataset (GFC) (Zhang et al., 2025), along with the                                

> Agent Model Input ↓Output ↓Total ↓
> With Business Policy
> GLM-4.5-Air 40.3k 1.5k 42k GLM-4.5 39k 1.6k 40.3k xLAM-2-32B 40k 5k 45k Qwen-2.5-32B 39k 4k 43k
> Without Business Policy
> PA 125k 5k 30k
> PA 225k 20k 45k
> PA 3w/o Length Penalty 25k 14k 39k
> PA 325k 2.6k 27k

Table 2: Mean number of input, output and total words for a single trajectory. Input consists of user request and tool response, while output consists of assistant response and tool call turn. 

domain-specific tool-calling dataset (APIGen) in-troduced by Prabhakar et al. (2025). APIGen is particularly well-suited for our framework, as it fol-lows the same business policies as our evaluation dataset, τ -Bench (Yao et al., 2024). While both our training and test data share the same policy descriptions, during evaluation we don’t use those policies. During analysis, we identified several trajecto-ries in APIGen that contain hallucinated tool calls. After removing these, we retain 4.8k high-quality trajectories. We then randomly sample 50 trajecto-ries from each domain to reserve for Stage 3 GRPO training, referring to this subset as APIGen-GRPO .The remaining 4.7k trajectories are used directly for Stage 1 training and are further augmented with synthetically generated CoTs produced by our pipeline (described in §3.1) for Stage 2 training. 

4.2 Evaluation Dataset & Metric 

We use τ -Bench (Yao et al., 2024) as our primary evaluation dataset. We evaluate on both the airline and retail domains. Following (Prabhakar et al., 2025), we use pass@1 as the main evaluation met-ric. Detailed implementation information is pro-vided in §E. 

4.3 Baselines 

We compare our model with several baselines to demonstrate the effect of our method. 

With Business Policy: We have used several 

closed source models: (1) Claude-3.5, (2) Claude-3.7, (3) Claude-4; and open source models: (4) GLM-4.5, (5) Qwen-2.5, (6) xLAM-2 as baselines. 

Without Business Policy: Since the original closed- and open-source models are not trained 5Model Accuracy (%) ↑       

> Random 50.00 xLAM-2-32b 55.10
> PA 151.02
> PA 269.39
> PA 2w/o Continual SFT (stage 1) 67.35
> PA 371.43

Table 3: QA-based knowledge test result on different models and stages of our method. The generation is sampled using temperature 0.0 for reproducibility. 

on the exact policy set, we evaluate three cat-egories of baselines. (i) Continual-SFT only: 

base instruction-tuned models further trained on GFC and APIGen (§3.2) – PA 1 (Qwen-2.5). (ii) Continual-SFT + CoT-SFT: models fine-tuned on GFC and APIGen, followed by CoT-augmented APIGen (§3.2) – PA 2 (Qwen-2.5). (iii) Open-source SFT on the same domain: open-source SOTA models directly fine-tuned on the APIGen dataset – xLAM-2 (Prabhakar et al., 2025). We note that the comparison between our trained models and the zero-shot baselines is not a strict like-for-like evaluation. Instead, these results high-light the value of policy distillation in improving performance and efficiency. 

5 Results & Analysis 

Our primary results on the τ -Bench dataset are pre-sented in Table 1. The findings indicate that while proprietary or extremely large models (e.g., GLM-4.5) achieve higher pass@k scores, they do so at the cost of substantially larger model sizes, increased computational requirements, higher latency, and greater inference cost. In contrast, our models are an order of magnitude smaller than GLM-4.5 (32B vs. 355B) and, even without in-context business policies, outperform similarly sized models that rely on such policies. Specifically, our Stage 1 model ( PA 1), trained solely via continual fine-tuning, achieves perfor-mance comparable to xLAM-2, which is expected given that both models are fine-tuned on similar data. Stage 2, which incorporates CoT-augmented SFT, yields a substantial improvement, boosting pass@1 from ∼37% to ∼50%. However, we ob-serve an increased word count due to the newly introduced thinking block. Finally, Stage 3 with GRPO further improves accuracy while signifi-cantly reducing word usage. We find that most of the gains come from the “Airline” domain (Table 1), whereas improvements 1 2 3 4

> Round
> 7.4
> 7.6
> 7.8
> 8.0
> 8.2
> 8.4
> 8.6
> 8.8
> Average Score  +8.8%
> +14.6%
> +10.8%
> +4.5%
> Completeness
> Faithfulness
> Atomicity
> Style

Figure 4: Evolution of CoT quality metrics through iterative generation-refinement, showing consistent im-provements across all dimensions (4.5%–14.6% gains). 

in the “Retail” domain are considerably smaller (147% relative improvement over xLAM in the Airline domain vs. 12% in Retail ). This ob-servation is consistent with the findings of Yao et al. (2024), which reports only minor perfor-mance drops in the “Retail” setting when business policies are removed. Through a fine-grained ex-amination of the ground-truth policy documents, we find that the “airline” policies are substantially more out-of-distribution, unlikely to have appeared during pre-training. As a result, pretrained mod-els have little to no parametric knowledge of this domain. In contrast, the “retail” policies are very common across many retail-oriented datasets, mak-ing it far more likely that pretrained models already have those in their parametric knowledge. A more detailed analysis with examples of different do-mains is shown in §B. 

5.1 Compression Ratio 

To further validate the compression ratio achieved by our method, we provide a fine-grained analysis of both input and output word counts in Table 2. Here, the input includes the user request and the tool response returned from the tool call, while the output includes both the assistant response and the generated tool call. We report word counts rather than tokens to ensure a fair comparison across mod-els with different tokenizers. The results show that our final-stage model produces the smallest total word count among all models and configurations. A deeper analysis reveals that our Stage 1 model (PA 1), trained only with continual SFT, generates a comparable number of words to its counterparts. In Stage 2 ( PA 2), however, the introduction of CoT reasoning substantially increases output length. Be-6Model Filtered Pass@1 ↑                   

> CoT? Airline Retail Avg.
> PA 2×36.85 61.22 49.04
> PA 2✓36.95 63.07 50.01
> PA 3×37.40 60.20 48.80
> PA 3✓42.00 65.51 53.75
> Table 4: Performance comparison of filtered vs. unfil-tered Chain-of-Thought training.

cause the thinking block resembles behavior in mathematical reasoning tasks at this stage, the model often re-evaluates the same policy multi-ple times for verification, leading to a significant increase in output words. Even PA 3, when trained without the length penalty, does not meaningfully reduce output length – highlighting the necessity of the length penalty. With all rewards and penalties included, our final model demonstrates the most efficient token usage. We emphasize that the token savings reported above is for inference time. Although our method has an upfront training cost (see §E), this one-time expense is offset by the reduced cost of serving thousands of queries daily. 

5.2 QA-based Knowledge Test 

To assess whether the trained models have acquired business policy knowledge, we manually create 500 yes/no-questions from the τ -Bench airline do-main. These questions were manually curated by the authors from the policy document. The results of the knowledge test are provided in Table 3. We have used a simple QA prompt to ask the question. As expected, the primary improvement in policy knowledge occurs during the CoT-augmented SFT stage. Continual-SFT alone does not meaningfully improve policy recall. In contrast, CoT training explicitly forces the model to recall and apply the relevant policies. The final GRPO stage primarily contributes to reducing hallucinations (through the PolicyRecall penalty) and decreasing output length (through the Length Penalty). 

5.3 Ablation Study Impact of CoT Filtering 

Recall that we employ a multi-stage filter-ing–refinement pipeline to generate CoTs for each turn, which introduces a significant computational cost. While a more cost-effective approach would be to use the CoTs from the first round directly, we examine the necessity of multi-stage filtering                     

> Model Pass@1 ↑
> Airline Retail Avg.
> PA 2+ TF 40.40 56.52 48.46
> PA 2+ TF + PR 38.00 60.52 49.26
> PA 2+ TF + PR + HP 41.33 62.61 52.97
> PA 2+ TF + PR + HP + LP 42.00 65.51 53.75
> Table 5: Model performance with various reward scores. TF = Turn, Format reward, PR = correct policy-recall reward, HP = hallucination penalty, LP = length penalty.

and refinement from quantitative, qualitative, and end-performance perspectives. First, Fig. 4 illustrates the improvement in rubric scores across refinement stages. The results show a clear positive impact of multi-stage filtering on the overall quality of the generated CoTs. The most notable gains occur in Faithfulness , which is the most crucial metric for a policy-adherent agents. We also observe substantial improvements in both 

Completeness and Atomicity , further motivating the need for iterative refinement. Overall, the average rubric score increases from ∼7.5 to ∼8.8. Next, from a qualitative standpoint, in Fig. 5, we compare two CoTs generated at different stages. As shown, the initial round typically retrieves some relevant policies but often misses crucial ones and occasionally hallucinates information. By evalu-ating these CoTs and providing refinement sum-maries, the subsequent stages are able to steer the reasoning in the correct direction, producing more accurate and policy-grounded CoTs. Finally, from an end-performance perspective, we examine the impact of CoT filtering in Table 4. The results show that filtered CoTs provide a clear benefit for GRPO-based training (48.80 → 53.75), while the effect on SFT alone is more modest (49.04 → 50.01). This suggests that CoT quality matters most when the training objective explic-itly optimizes for policy recall. We hypothesize that using incomplete or hallucinated CoTs dur-ing Stage 2 introduces errors that may push the model into a suboptimal region from which recov-ery is difficult. Even though the filtered CoTs do not directly influence the Stage 3 training data, the GRPO stage begins from the Stage 2 checkpoint; therefore, noisy or low-quality CoTs in Stage 2 can negatively shift the model’s distribution, ultimately harming final performance. In practice, the extra compute cost of multi-round filtering is outweighed by the substantial gains in both CoT quality (Figs. 4 and 5) and down-stream performance (Table 4). 7Human:               

> Hi! I recently received a pair of white running shoes that I 'd like to exchange.
> Chain-of-Thought (on Round 1)
> First, I’ll need to verify the customer’s identity before accessing any order details. I can do this by requesting their email address, or alternatively their name and date of birth, and I’ll clarify that this information is needed to locate their account. Missing - delivery status check Before moving forward, I’ll make sure the customer understands the process and provide a final confirmation step so they explicitly approve the exchange request.
> Rubric Score
> Completeness -2.0 || Atomicity -10.0 || Faithfulness -3.5 || Style -8.5
> Chain-of-Thought (after Round 4)
> Okay, the user wants to exchange a pair of white running shoes they recently received. First things first, I need to authenticate their identity. That 's a must before I can access any order information or proceed with the exchange. I should ask for their email address, or alternatively, their name and zip code. This will allow me to locate their user ID. Once I 've authenticated them, I 'll need to verify the order status. They mentioned "recently received," but I have to make sure it 's marked as "delivered" in our system. This is crucial because only delivered orders can be exchanged. Now, about the exchange itself. The policy states it must be for the same product type, which in this case is running shoes, so that 's fine. I should mention this to set clear expectations. I also need to emphasize that user confirmation will be required before we can proceed with the exchange. It 's a crucial step in the process, not just a formality.
> Rubric Score
> Completeness -9.0 || Atomicity -10.0 || Faithfulness -9.5 || Style -9.0

Figure 5: Example CoTs across different rounds of filtering and refinement. Correct and relevant policies are shown in green, hallucinated policies in red, and missing policies in orange. 

Impact of Policy Recall Reward 

In this experiment, we ablate the PolicyRecall re-wards introduced in §3.2. Recall that the PolicyRe-call reward includes three components: Correct Policy Reward, Hallucination Penalty, and Policy Recall Length Penalty. In Table 5, we incremen-tally add each component to our Stage 2 model to examine its contribution to final performance. We first observe that adding only the Correct Policy Reward actually degrades performance in the Airline domain (40.40 → 38.00). The Airline domain is more out-of-distribution relative to the model’s pre-training distribution (see §B for fur-ther discussion). We hypothesize that introducing only the Correct Policy reward increases the risk of hallucination in this more OOD setting. Adding a Hallucination Penalty mitigates this is-sue, leading to improvements in Pass@1 across both domains. Finally, incorporating a Length Penalty reduces token usage while further improv-ing performance. These results highlight the im-portance of both the PolicyRecall reward and the Hallucination Penalty in improving accuracy, while the Length Penalty plays a crucial role in reducing overall token cost (Table 2). An ablation of over-riding already learned policies is provided in §C. 

6 Conclusion & Future Work 

Building agents that adhere to business policies without relying on in-context policy descriptions is a critical challenge. This paper addresses this issue through a multi-stage training strategy with a cen-tral emphasis on policy recall during CoT reason-ing. We make three key contributions: (1) a frame-work for automatically extracting high-quality CoT traces that is adaptable across diverse business do-mains; (2) an RL reward design that combines pol-icy recall rewards with hallucination penalties; and (3) empirical evidence demonstrating substantial performance improvements. Our findings reveal that SFT improves policy recall on familiar do-mains but is prone to memorization; RL improves task performance over more OOD data, though whether this constitutes true generalization beyond the evaluated domains remains an open question for future work. We hope our work–automatic CoT 8extraction, policy-recall rewards, and systematic SFT-RL evaluation–provides foundational tools for building policy-aware language agents. 

7 Limitations 

While our method demonstrates strong policy ad-herence without requiring in-context business poli-cies, it incurs a substantial upfront cost for gen-erating high-quality and reliable chain-of-thought. Owing to the nature of LLMs and LLM-as-a-judge evaluation, there remains a risk of hallucinated poli-cies, especially in rare or under-specified cases. We mitigate this through multi-round evaluation and refinement. In addition, the approach may inherit biases from the underlying LLMs, which can in-fluence both the generated CoTs and the policy judgments. Next, while our method reduces the number of input tokens, it increases the number of output to-kens by introducing explicit reasoning. For rea-soning models, this increase is not substantial, as they typically produce a reasoning block regard-less. However, for non-reasoning models, this may result in a noticeable increase in output token us-age. Future work could compress these reason-ing traces into latent tokens, following recent ap-proaches (Cheng and Durme, 2024), although this direction is beyond the scope of this work. Finally, training on a fixed set of policies risks overfitting to that specific version, reducing relia-bility when policies change and requiring frequent retraining. One potential solution is to incorpo-rate additional synthetic policy-override data dur-ing training to teach the model how to adapt to overridden policies and mitigate overfitting. We leave this direction for future work. 

References 

Emre Can Acikgoz, Jeremiah Greer, Akul Datta, Ze Yang, William Zeng, Oussama Elachqar, Em-manouil Koukoumidis, Dilek Hakkani-Tür, and Gokhan Tur. 2025. Can a Single Model Master Both Multi-turn Conversations and Tool Use? CoALM: A Unified Conversational Agentic Language Model. 

arXiv preprint . ArXiv:2502.08820 [cs]. Jeffrey Cheng and Benjamin Van Durme. 2024. Com-pressed Chain of Thought: Efficient Reasoning Through Dense Representations. arXiv preprint .ArXiv:2412.13171 [cs]. Cheng-Han Chiang and Hung-yi Lee. 2023. A Closer Look into Using Large Language Models for Au-tomatic Evaluation. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 , pages 8928–8942, Singapore. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. DeepSeek-AI, Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu, Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, Xiaokang Zhang, Xingkai Yu, Yu Wu, Z. F. Wu, Zhibin Gou, Zhihong Shao, Zhuoshu Li, Ziyi Gao, and 181 others. 2025. DeepSeek-R1: Incentivizing Reasoning Capability in LLMs via Reinforcement Learning. arXiv preprint .ArXiv:2501.12948 [cs]. Shubhashis Roy Dipta, Khairul Mahbub, and Nadia Na-jjar. 2026. Ganitllm: Difficulty-aware bengali mathe-matical reasoning through curriculum-grpo. Preprint ,arXiv:2601.06767. Jinlan Fu, See-Kiong Ng, Zhengbao Jiang, and Pengfei Liu. 2024a. GPTScore: Evaluate as you desire. In 

Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 6556–6576, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Weiping Fu, Bifan Wei, Jianxiang Hu, Zhongmin Cai, and Jun Liu. 2024b. QGEval: Benchmarking multi-dimensional evaluation for question generation. In 

Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 11783–11803, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Leo Gao, John Schulman, and Jacob Hilton. 2023. Scal-ing laws for reward model overoptimization. In In-ternational Conference on Machine Learning , pages 10835–10866. PMLR. David Gu, Peter Belcak, and Roger Wattenhofer. 2025a. Text compression for efficient language generation. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Na-tions of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-nologies (Volume 4: Student Research Workshop) ,pages 186–192, Albuquerque, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Jiawei Gu, Xuhui Jiang, Zhichao Shi, Hexiang Tan, Xuehao Zhai, Chengjin Xu, Wei Li, Yinghan Shen, Shengjie Ma, Honghao Liu, Saizhuo Wang, Kun Zhang, Yuanzhuo Wang, Wen Gao, Lionel Ni, and Jian Guo. 2025b. A survey on llm-as-a-judge. 

Preprint , arXiv:2411.15594. Melody Y. Guan, Manas Joglekar, Eric Wallace, Saachi Jain, Boaz Barak, Alec Helyar, Rachel Dias, An-drea Vallone, Hongyu Ren, Jason Wei, Hyung Won Chung, Sam Toyer, Johannes Heidecke, Alex Beutel, and Amelia Glaese. 2025. Deliberative Alignment: Reasoning Enables Safer Language Models. arXiv preprint . ArXiv:2412.16339 [cs]. Daya Guo, Canwen Xu, Nan Duan, Jian Yin, and Ju-lian McAuley. 2023. Longcoder: A long-range 

9pre-trained language model for code completion. 

Preprint , arXiv:2306.14893. Qi He, Cheng Qian, Xiusi Chen, Bingxiang He, Yi R. Fung, and Heng Ji. 2025. Veri-R1: Toward Precise and Faithful Claim Verification via Online Reinforce-ment Learning. arXiv preprint . ArXiv:2510.01932 [cs]. Ruixin Hong, Hongming Zhang, Xiaoman Pan, Dong Yu, and Changshui Zhang. 2024. Abstraction-of-thought makes language models better reasoners. In 

Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 1993–2027, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Priyanka Kargupta, Ishika Agarwal, Tal August, and Jiawei Han. 2025. Tree-of-Debate: Multi-Persona Debate Trees Elicit Critical Thinking for Scientific Comparative Analysis. arXiv preprint .ArXiv:2502.14767 [cs]. Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Effi-cient memory management for large language model serving with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles .Tamera Lanham, Anna Chen, Ansh Radhakrishnan, Benoit Steiner, Carson Denison, Danny Hernandez, Dustin Li, Esin Durmus, Evan Hubinger, Jackson Kernion, Kamil ˙e Lukoši ¯ut ˙e, Karina Nguyen, Newton Cheng, Nicholas Joseph, Nicholas Schiefer, Oliver Rausch, Robin Larson, Sam McCandlish, Sandi-pan Kundu, and 11 others. 2023. Measuring faith-fulness in chain-of-thought reasoning. Preprint ,arXiv:2307.13702. Dongyub Lee, Younghun Jeong, Hwa-Yeon Kim, Hongyeon Yu, Seunghyun Han, Taesun Whang, Se-ungwoo Cho, Chanhee Lee, Gunsu Lee, and Young-bum Kim. 2024. Tree-of-question: Structured re-trieval framework for Korean question answering systems. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-nologies (Volume 6: Industry Track) , pages 406–418, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics. Minzhi Li, Zhengyuan Liu, Shumin Deng, Shafiq Joty, Nancy Chen, and Min-Yen Kan. 2025. DnA-eval: Enhancing large language model evaluation through decomposition and aggregation. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Computational Linguistics , pages 2277–2290, Abu Dhabi, UAE. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Yucheng Li, Bo Dong, Frank Guerin, and Chenghua Lin. 2023. Compressing context to enhance inference ef-ficiency of large language models. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-ral Language Processing , pages 6342–6353, Singa-pore. Association for Computational Linguistics. Zuxin Liu, Thai Hoang, Jianguo Zhang, Ming Zhu, Tian Lan, Shirley Kokane, Juntao Tan, Weiran Yao, Zhiwei Liu, Yihao Feng, and 1 others. 2024. Api-gen: Automated pipeline for generating verifiable and diverse function-calling datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.18518 .Zabir Al Nazi, Shubhashis Roy Dipta, and Sudipta Kar. 2026. †dagger: Distractor-aware graph generation for executable reasoning in math problems. Preprint ,arXiv:2601.06853. Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Car-roll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. 2022. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. Preprint , arXiv:2203.02155. Akshara Prabhakar, Zuxin Liu, Ming Zhu, Jianguo Zhang, Tulika Awalgaonkar, Shiyu Wang, Zhiwei Liu, Haolin Chen, Thai Hoang, Juan Carlos Niebles, Shelby Heinecke, Weiran Yao, Huan Wang, Silvio Savarese, and Caiming Xiong. 2025. APIGen-MT: Agentic Pipeline for Multi-Turn Data Generation via Simulated Agent-Human Interplay. arXiv preprint .ArXiv:2504.03601 [cs]. Cheng Qian, Emre Can Acikgoz, Qi He, Hongru Wang, Xiusi Chen, Dilek Hakkani-Tür, Gokhan Tur, and Heng Ji. 2025. ToolRL: Reward is All Tool Learning Needs. arXiv preprint . ArXiv:2504.13958 [cs]. Leonardo Ranaldi and Andre Freitas. 2024. Aligning large and small language models via chain-of-thought reasoning. In Proceedings of the 18th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1812–1827, St. Julian’s, Malta. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Swarnadeep Saha, Omer Levy, Asli Celikyilmaz, Mohit Bansal, Jason Weston, and Xian Li. 2024. Branch-solve-merge improves large language model evalu-ation and generation. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 8352–8370, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics. Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. 2023. Toolformer: Language Models Can Teach Themselves to Use Tools. arXiv preprint . ArXiv:2302.04761 [cs]. John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. 2017. Prox-imal policy optimization algorithms. Preprint ,arXiv:1707.06347. 

10 Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, Y. K. Li, Y. Wu, and Daya Guo. 2024. DeepSeekMath: Pushing the Limits of Mathemat-ical Reasoning in Open Language Models. arXiv preprint . ArXiv:2402.03300 [cs]. Rickard Stureborg, Dimitris Alikaniotis, and Yoshi Suhara. 2024. Large Language Models are In-consistent and Biased Evaluators. arXiv preprint .ArXiv:2405.01724 [cs]. DiJia Su, Hanlin Zhu, Yingchen Xu, Jiantao Jiao, Yuan-dong Tian, and Qinqing Zheng. 2025. Token As-sorted: Mixing Latent and Text Tokens for Im-proved Language Model Reasoning. arXiv preprint .ArXiv:2502.03275 [cs]. Elizaveta Tennant, Stephen Hailes, and Mirco Musolesi. 2025. Moral alignment for llm agents. Preprint ,arXiv:2410.01639. Ante Wang, Linfeng Song, Ye Tian, Baolin Peng, Lifeng Jin, Haitao Mi, Jinsong Su, and Dong Yu. 2024a. Self-consistency boosts calibration for math reason-ing. In Findings of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 6023–6029, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Peiyi Wang, Lei Li, Liang Chen, Zefan Cai, Dawei Zhu, Binghuai Lin, Yunbo Cao, Lingpeng Kong, Qi Liu, Tianyu Liu, and Zhifang Sui. 2024b. Large lan-guage models are not fair evaluators. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 9440–9450, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Lixin Wu, Na Cai, Qiao Cheng, Jiachen Wang, and Yitao Duan. 2025. Confucius3-Math: ALightweight High-Performance Reasoning LLM for Chinese K-12 Mathematics Learning. arXiv preprint .ArXiv:2506.18330 [cs] version: 2. Fanjia Yan, Huanzhi Mao, Charlie Cheng-Jie Ji, Tianjun Zhang, Shishir G. Patil, Ion Stoica, and Joseph E. Gonzalez. 2024. Berkeley function calling leader-board. Shunyu Yao, Noah Shinn, Pedram Razavi, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2024. tau-bench: A benchmark for tool-agent-user interaction in real-world domains. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.12045 .Qiying Yu, Zheng Zhang, Ruofei Zhu, Yufeng Yuan, Xiaochen Zuo, Yu Yue, Tiantian Fan, Gaohong Liu, Lingjun Liu, Xin Liu, Haibin Lin, Zhiqi Lin, Bole Ma, Guangming Sheng, Yuxuan Tong, Chi Zhang, Mofan Zhang, Wang Zhang, Hang Zhu, and 16 oth-ers. 2025. DAPO: An Open-Source LLM Rein-forcement Learning System at Scale. arXiv preprint .ArXiv:2503.14476 [cs] version: 1. Jianguo Zhang, Thai Hoang, Ming Zhu, Zuxin Liu, Shiyu Wang, Tulika Awalgaonkar, Akshara Prab-hakar, Haolin Chen, Weiran Yao, Zhiwei Liu, Juntao Tan, Juan Carlos Niebles, Shelby Heinecke, Huan Wang, Silvio Savarese, and Caiming Xiong. 2025. ActionStudio: A Lightweight Framework for Data and Training of Large Action Models. arXiv preprint .ArXiv:2503.22673 [cs]. Yuze Zhao, Jintao Huang, Jinghan Hu, Xingjun Wang, Yunlin Mao, Daoze Zhang, Zeyinzi Jiang, Zhikai Wu, Baole Ai, Ang Wang, and 1 others. 2025. Swift: a scalable lightweight infrastructure for fine-tuning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 39, pages 29733–29735. Chujie Zheng, Shixuan Liu, Mingze Li, Xiong-Hui Chen, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Kai Dang, Yuqiong Liu, Rui Men, An Yang, Jingren Zhou, and Junyang Lin. 2025. Group Sequence Policy Optimization. 

arXiv preprint . ArXiv:2507.18071 [cs]. 

11 Appendix A CoT Evaluation Thresholds 

Table 6 reports the rubric thresholds used in the evaluation–filtering cycle (§3.1). A CoT must meet 

all thresholds simultaneously to pass; otherwise it is sent to the refinement stage. The thresholds re-flect our design priority: Faithfulness is the strictest (a perfect score of 10 is required, as any halluci-nated policy is unacceptable), followed by Com-pleteness, Atomicity, and Style. These values were hand-engineered based on qualitative inspection of CoTs near each boundary and kept fixed through-out all experiments.      

> Rubric Threshold ( ≥)
> Faithfulness 10 Completeness 9Atomicity 7Style 6
> Table 6: Minimum rubric scores (on a 1–10 scale) re-quired for a generated CoT to pass the evaluation stage.

B Airline vs. Retail Policy 

The results in Table 1 shows that the improvement gain in airline domain is much higher than the retail domain. Through manual analysis, we identify the following reasons. 

B.1 Uncommon policies 

These policies differ numerically or conceptually from those found in real-world datasets. For ex-ample, “each reservation can have at most five pas-sengers,” whereas in most real-world scenarios, airlines allow an arbitrary number of passengers. Additional examples are provided below: • Each reservation can use at most one travel cer-tificate, at most one credit card, and at most three gift cards. • The remaining amount of a travel certificate is not refundable. • The user can add but not remove checked bags. • The user cannot add insurance after initial book-ing. • The user can modify passengers but cannot mod-ify the number of passengers. This is something that even a human agent cannot assist with. • basic economy or economy flights can be can-celled only if travel insurance is bought and the condition is met, and business flights can always be cancelled. The rules are strict regardless of the membership status. The API does not check these for the agent, so the agent must make sure the rules apply before calling the API! 

B.2 Conditional Rules 

These rules depend on conditions that are highly specific to a particular business context. Additional examples are provided below: • If the booking user is a regular member, 0 free checked bag for each basic economy passenger, 1 free checked bag for each economy passen-ger, and 2 free checked bags for each business passenger. • If the booking user is a silver member, 1 free checked bag for each basic economy passenger, 2 free checked bag for each economy passen-ger, and 3 free checked bags for each business passenger. • If the booking user is a gold member, 2 free checked bag for each basic economy passenger, 3 free checked bag for each economy passen-ger, and 3 free checked bags for each business passenger. • Each extra baggage is 50 dollars. • If the user is silver/gold member or has travel insurance or flies business, and complains about cancelled flights in a reservation, the agent can offer a certificate as a gesture after confirming the facts, with the amount being $100 times the number of passengers. • Do not compensate if the user is regular mem-ber and has no travel insurance and flies (basic) economy. 

B.3 What about Retail? 

The retail policies are generally generic, such as “returns will arrive in 5–7 business days” or “prod-ucts must be returned within 30 days.” Upon closer inspection, we identified only a single policy that is truly specific to the business: • Our retail store has 50 types of products. For each type of product, there are variant items of different options. For example, for a ’t shirt’ product, there could be an item with option 12 Stage Data Policy In-Context? Objective Model             

> 1GFC + APIGen ✓General + Policy tool-calling PA 1
> 2CoT-augmented APIGen ×Policy Recall via CoT PA 2
> 3APIGen-GRPO (900 unseen) ×RL for Precise Policy Recall PA 3
> Table 7: Overview of the three-stage training recipe. Each stage builds on the checkpoint from the previous stage.

’color blue size M’, and another item with option ’color red size L’. As illustrated, the number of uncommon or highly specific policies is substantially higher in the Airline domain. In contrast, the Retail domain contains largely generic rules (e.g., standard re-turn windows) that are common across most retail businesses. While this reflects a limitation of the 

τ -Bench dataset, real-world business policies tend to be far more domain-specific. This also explains the smaller performance gains observed in the Retail setting compared to the Airline domain .

C Override Policies 

Business policies often change frequently– sometimes even daily–making it impractical to retrain a model each time a policy is updated. Therefore, in this section, we will explore if we can override some of the already learned business policies through in-context prompting. To evaluate this capability, we synthetically aug-ment the τ -Bench dataset. Given the OOD nature of the “Airline” domain (details in §B), we built 

τ -overrule on top of the airline domain. Fig. 6 summarizes our pipeline for constructing override tasks by replacing a single crucial policy with its contrastive counterpart and then checking whether the agent follows the new policy in context. 

C.1 Contrastive Policy Generation 

We generate contrastive policies that are easily ver-ifiable (left box in Fig. 6). This process employs a human-in-the-loop system. Specifically, for each atomic policy in the airline domain, we prompt an LLM to generate up to 10 contrastive policies that contradict the original policy. Each generated pol-icy is then reviewed and filtered by the authors and labeled as either keep or drop .Following this initial generation-filtering loop, all kept contrastive policies undergo a second round of human refinement. In this stage, the goal is to revise the policies to ensure they are both clearly written and directly oppose the original policy. 

C.2 Contrastive Task Generation 

At this stage (middle box in Fig. 6), we use the previously generated contrastive policies to cre-ate override tasks. τ -Bench includes 50 tasks in the airline domain. For each task, we first use an LLM-based extractor to identify all relevant poli-cies necessary to fulfill the user request. Our initial analysis revealed that not all policies are suitable for replacement, particularly those with trivial impact, i.e., a policy like “ask for explicit yes before running any database call” is difficult to validate if overridden with “don’t ask for explicit yes,” as it minimally affects task outcome and is hard to verify in conversation. To address this, we use another LLM to ex-tract the most critical policy from all the relevant policies–one whose alteration would make it hard to satisfy the user request. We then replace this cru-cial policy with its contrastive counterpart from our previously constructed contrastive policy database. 

C.3 Evaluation 

During evaluation, we first let the agent model and a user-simulated LLM to generate the full conver-sation given the override policy in context (exact prompt is provided in F.1). Next, we employ a pow-erful LLM-as-a-judge (i.e. Claude-3.7-Sonnet )to assess whether the agent adhered to the overrid-den policy. 

C.4 Results       

> Agent Model Override Accuracy ↑
> Random 50.00 xLAM-2-32b 33.87
> PA 137.87
> PA 247.01
> PA 353.33
> Table 8: Override accuracy of different models in our synthetically generated dataset.

The results for policy overriding are presented in Table 8. While our final model outperforms the SFT baselines on this task, its accuracy remains 13 Policy Document (Airline)                       

> 1. Each bag costs $50
> 2. Policy 2 3. .…….…. 4. Policy N
> Atomic Processor
> LLM Each Policy i
> 1. Each bag costs upto $20
> 2. Contrastive Policy 1b 3. Contrastive Policy 1c 4. Contrastive Policy 2a 5. Contrastive Policy 2b 6. …..…………..………. 7. Contrastive Policy 4d
> Keep
> Drop
> 1. Each bag costs $20
> 2. Contrastive Policy 1b 3. Contrastive Policy 1c 4. Contrastive Policy 2a 5. Contrastive Policy 2b 6. …..…………..………. 7. Contrastive Policy 4d
> Stage 1: Filtering
> Stage 2: Reͽning

Contrastive Policy Generation   

> Contrastive Policy Original Policy Document (Airline)
> Relevant Policies
> Relevant Policy Extractor
> User Request
> Crucial Policy Extractor
> Crucial Policy
> Conversation History
> Evaluator
> (Claude 4)
> 1. Refund 2. # of Passenger …3. baggage Previous Policy:
> each bag costs $50

Contrastive Task Generation Evaluation    

> Policy →Generated Contrastive Policy(s)
> New Policy:
> each bag costs $20

Figure 6: Overview of the Override Policy task generation and evaluation pipeline, consisting of Contrastive Policy Generation, Contrastive Task Generation, and Policy Overriding Evaluation. 

only slightly above random. We believe that incor-porating instruction-following datasets during SFT (Stage 2) and GRPO training (Stage 3) would sub-stantially improve the model’s ability to override policies when required. We leave this direction for future work. 

D Turn Reward 

D.1 Assistant Turn Reward: 

For the assistant response turn, we have used the reward model as the LLM-as-a-judge. We prompt the LLM to score the generated response based on the ground truth response and penalize if the same information is not provided as the ground truth. 

Rassistant_correct = 6 · r

10 − 3 ∈ [−3, 3] 

where r is the raw score from the reward model. Reward model prompt is provided in F.12. 

D.2 Tool-Call Turn Reward: 

We adopt the reward formulation for tool-call turns from Qian et al. (2025). Unlike their approach, our method calls only a single tool at each turn, and we modify the reward score accordingly. The tool-call correctness reward consists of three components. 

a. Tool Name Matching: 

rname = |G ∩ P ||G ∪ P | ∈ [0 , 1] 

where G and P are the sets of tool names extracted from the ground-truth and predicted tool calls, re-spectively. 

b. Parameter Name Matching: 

rparam = |param (G) ∩ param (P )||param (G) ∪ param (P )| ∈ [0 , 1] 

where param (PG) and param (PP ) represent the parameter names of the predicted and ground-truth tool calls, respectively. 

c. Parameter Value Matching: 

rvalue = X

k∈param (G)

1[G[k] = P [k]] 

∈ [0 , |param (Gj )|]

where G[k]] and P [k] represent the values of the parameters for the predicted and ground truth tool calls. The total reward score is computed by finding the optimal matching between P and G to maximize the total match score: Total reward for each tool-call is: 

rmatch = rname + rparam + rvalue ∈ [0 , S max ]

where Smax = 1 + 1 + |param (G)| denotes the maximum possible score. Finally, we normalize the tool-call turn reward to lie within the range [−3, 3] .

Rtool_correct = 6 · rSmax 

− 3 ∈ [−3, 3] 

where r denotes the current match score from the current generation. The final correctness reward 

Rtool_correct is the normalized reward for the match-ing process. 

D.3 Total Turn Reward: 

rmatch _turn =



Rassistant _correct ∈ [−3, 3] 

if assistant 

Rtool _correct ∈ [−3, 3] 

if tool-call 

Rcorrect = 1[turn [G] = turn [P ]] 

· rmatch _turn ∈ [−3, 3] 

14 where turn [G] and turn [P ] denotes the generated turn (assistant or tool call) and predicted turn re-spectively. 

E Implementation Details 

For the CoT generation pipeline , we use VLLM (Kwon et al., 2023) to run inference with 

deepseek-r1 on 8 H200 GPUs. For evaluation, we employ Claude-3.5-v1 via the Bedrock frame-work. For Multi-Stage Training , we adopt the Swift framework (Zhao et al., 2025) to train all models. Training is conducted on 8 H200 GPUs with the following durations: 1 day for Stage 1, 8 hours for Stage 2, and 3 days for Stage 3. We initialize from a raw instruction-tuned model, fine-tune it for 15 epochs in Stages 1 and 2, and then apply GRPO training for 20 epochs. In Tables 9 and 10, we provide the detailed hyperparameters used for our SFT and GRPO training. The same set of hyperpa-rameters is applied across all model variants and sizes. For Evaluation , we use 8 H200 GPUs with VLLM for agent-model inference and Bedrock for the user model. Unless otherwise specified, the user model is Claude-4-Sonnet with temperature 0.0, following the τ -Bench-framework. 

F Prompts 

F.1 Overriding Policy Prompt 

Prompt F.1: Overriding Policy System Prompt 

### New policies: Some policies have changed, below you are given the old policy with the new one. You MUST override the old policy with the new one. <old_policy> {{old_policy}} </old_policy> <new_policy> {{new_policy}} </new_policy> 

F.2 CoT Trace Generation Prompts 

Prompt F.2: CoT Generation 

You are an AI assistant generating a first-person Chain of Thought (CoT) explaining your reasoning for your response in a conversation. The reasoning MUST lead to the given response or function call. 

Inputs: - Business policy: {policy} - Conversation history: {conversation} - Your response: {assistant_response} Task: Generate a first-person CoT explaining your reasoning for the last user query, connecting it to your final response or function call. Steps: 1. Identify the last user query and your response 2. Analyze the business policy for relevant points needed for your response only (not future turns) 3. Formulate a first-person CoT explaining how policy informed your response Required Properties: - Completeness: Include all relevant policy parts for the response - Atomicity: Be concise, focus only on last query and response - Faithfulness: Only mention information explicitly stated in policy - Style: First-person narrative mimicking natural thought Analysis Process: <reasoning> 1. State the exact last user query and your response 2. Quote relevant policy parts 3. List potential tools or function calls 4. Consider multiple policy interpretations 5. Identify edge cases or ambiguities 6. Connect each policy point to query and response 7. Consider potential misunderstandings in user query 8. Evaluate ethical implications 9. Draft initial first-person CoT 10. Check against required properties 11. Refine to directly connect request to final response </reasoning> Output Format: <chain_of_thought> [Write as natural thinking: "Okay, the user wants to... First I need to... Wait, the policy states... So I should... If [issue], then... Alright, here 's what I 'll do..."] </chain_of_thought> The CoT should be precise, focused only on the last turn, and adhere strictly to the policy information. 

Prompt F.3: CoT Error Summary Generation 

You are an AI assistant analyzing and summarizing evaluation results for Chain of Thought (CoT) reasoning. Provide a concise summary of errors, reasons, and satisfied metrics to help improve CoT generation. Inputs: 

15 Parameter Value 

Agent Template Hermes Train Type Full Learning Rate 1 × 10 −5

LR Scheduler Cosine with Min LR Minimum LR 1 × 10 −6

Warmup Ratio 0.05 Training Epochs 15 Global Batch Size 64 Max Sequence Length 32,768 Max Gradient Norm 1.0 Precision bfloat16 

Table 9: SFT Configuration 

Parameter Value 

Agent Template Hermes Train Type Full Learning Rate 1 × 10 −6

LR Scheduler Cosine with Min LR Minimum LR 1 × 10 −7

Warmup Ratio 0.05 Training Epochs 20 Global Batch Size 512 Max Gradient Norm 1.0 

GRPO-Specific 

KL Penalty Coefficient ( β) 0.1 Sampling Temperature 1.0 Number of Generations 4Number of Iteration 1Max Completion Length 2,048 

Table 10: GRPO Configuration 

- Chain of Thought: {cot} - Evaluation results: {eval_results} Analysis Steps: 1. Read the CoT and all evaluation results 2. Analyze for errors, reasons, and satisfied metrics 3. Create detailed analysis in error_summary tags 4. Produce concise summary for AI model consumption Output Format: <error_summary> Errors: - [List errors with severity ratings 1-5, where 1=minor, 5=critical] - [Quote relevant CoT parts for each error] Reasons: - [Explain primary reasons for errors] Satisfied Metrics: - [List satisfied evaluation metrics] Improvement Suggestions: - [Provide actionable suggestions] Additional Notes: [Any other relevant information] </error_summary> Requirements: - Quote relevant CoT parts for each error - Rate error severity (1-5 scale) - Provide actionable improvement suggestions - Structure for easy AI model comprehension 

Prompt F.4: CoT Refinement Prompt 

You are an expert at refining Chains of Thought (CoT) for policy-based conversations. Analyze the inputs below and produce a refined CoT that fixes identified issues. Inputs: - Policy: {policy} - Conversation: {conversation} - Your last response: {assistant_response} - Original CoT: {cot} - Error summary: {error_summary} Analysis Process: <cot_refinement_process> 1. Identify relevant policy sections for the last user query 2. Extract relevant conversation context 3. List main issues from error summary 4. Plan how to address each issue 5. Consider policy implications and edge cases 6. Think through the refinement step-by-step in a natural, self-correcting manner </cot_refinement_process> Criteria: - Completeness: Include all relevant policy parts - Atomicity: Be concise, focus only on the last query/response - Faithfulness: Only use information explicitly stated in policy - Style: First-person narrative mimicking natural thought Output Format: <refined_cot> [Write as if thinking aloud: "Okay, the user wants to... First I need to... Wait, the policy says... So I should... If [issue], then... Alright, here 's what I 'll do..."] </refined_cot> 

16 The refined CoT should read like an internal monologue addressing the last turn only. 

Prompt F.5: CoT Evaluation Rubric (Completeness) 

You are an expert AI evaluator assessing the completeness of a Chain of Thought (CoT) in relation to a policy and conversation. Evaluate how well the CoT captures all important policy information relevant to the assistant 's immediate response to the last user query. Inputs: - Policy: {policy} - Conversation: {conversation} - Assistant 's response: {assistant_response} - Chain of Thought: {cot} Task: Evaluate CoT completeness on a scale of 1-10. Completeness means including all important policy content necessary for the assistant 's immediate response only (not future turns). Evaluation Process: 1. Read policy, conversation, and CoT 2. Identify and quote relevant policy and conversation parts 3. List key policy points relevant to immediate response 4. Compare key points to CoT content 5. Note present or missing information 6. Consider impact on response quality 7. Provide specific action items for improvement Rating Scale: 10: Perfect - All relevant information included 9: Near-perfect - Only minor details missing 8: Very good - Most important information included 7: Good - Important information included, some details missing 6: Above average - Key points covered, several details omitted 5: Average - Some important information, significant omissions 4: Below average - Major gaps in important information 3: Poor - Most important information missing 2: Very poor - Minimal relevant information 1: Inadequate - No relevant policy information Output Format: <cot_evaluation> 1. Policy review: [Summary of relevant policy points] 2. Conversation analysis: [Key aspects] 3. Relevant quotes: [Direct quotes relevant to immediate response] 4. Key policy points: [List of important points for immediate response] 5. CoT comparison: [Compare key points to CoT content] 

6. Completeness assessment: [Identify included and missing information] 7. Impact analysis: [How completeness affects response quality] 8. Action items: [Specific improvements] </cot_evaluation> <analysis> [Brief explanation of completeness level, strengths, and weaknesses] </analysis> <rating> \boxed{[1-10]} </rating> 

Prompt F.6: CoT Evaluation Rubric (Faithfulness) 

You are an expert evaluator assessing the faithfulness of a Chain of Thought (CoT) to a given policy. Faithfulness measures how closely the CoT adheres to information explicitly stated in the policy. Inputs: - Policy: {policy} - Conversation: {conversation} - Your response: {assistant_response} - Chain of Thought: {cot} Task: Evaluate CoT faithfulness on a scale of 1-10. Focus only on policies needed for the assistant 's immediate response (not future turns or general context). Definition: A faithful CoT includes only information directly mentioned or immediately inferable from the policy. Rating Scale: 1: Completely unfaithful - Mostly non-policy information 5: Moderately faithful - Mix of policy-based and non-policy information 10: Perfectly faithful - Only policy information Evaluation Process: 1. Read policy, conversation, and CoT 2. Break down evaluation in cot_evaluation tags: a. List key points in CoT b. Quote relevant policy parts or note absence for each point c. Calculate percentage of faithful points d. Consider depth and accuracy of policy interpretation 3. Provide analysis 4. Give numeric rating 5. Include specific action items for improving faithfulness Output Format: <cot_evaluation> [Detailed evaluation process] </cot_evaluation> <analysis> 

17 [Concise analysis of CoT faithfulness to policy] </analysis> <rating> \boxed{[1-10]} </rating> 

Prompt F.7: CoT Evaluation Rubric (Atomicity) 

You are an expert AI evaluator assessing the Atomicity of a Chain of Thought (CoT). Atomicity refers to selecting concise and important policy content directly relevant to the assistant 's immediate response to the last user query. Inputs: - Policy: {policy} - Conversation: {conversation} - Your response: {assistant_response} - Chain of Thought: {cot} Task: Evaluate CoT Atomicity on a scale of 1-10. Focus only on policies needed for the assistant 's immediate response (not future turns or general context). Rating Scale: 1: Completely irrelevant - No relevant policy information 2: Highly irrelevant - Mostly irrelevant with tiny fraction relevant 3: Mostly irrelevant - Some relevant but overwhelmed by unnecessary details 4: Somewhat irrelevant - More irrelevant than relevant 5: Balanced but unfocused - Equal mix, lacking clear focus 6: Somewhat relevant - More relevant than irrelevant, some unnecessary details 7: Mostly relevant - Mostly relevant with few unnecessary details 8: Highly relevant - Almost all relevant, minimal extraneous content 9: Nearly perfect - Only relevant with perhaps one minor unnecessary detail 10: Perfect atomicity - Only most important and relevant information, perfectly concise Evaluation Process: <cot_evaluation> 1. Quote relevant policy parts for immediate response 2. Count relevant policy quotes 3. List key elements of last user query 4. Count key elements in user query 5. Match policy elements to query elements (only for immediate response) 6. Identify unnecessary or redundant information in CoT 7. Calculate percentage of relevant information 8. List missing key elements 9. Assess how well CoT leads to final response 10. Rate each aspect (1-10) with justification: 

a. Relevance of selected policy information b. Completeness of addressing query elements c. Absence of unnecessary information d. Contribution to final response 11. Provide specific action items for improving atomicity </cot_evaluation> <analysis> [Concise analysis of CoT atomicity] </analysis> <rating> \boxed{[1-10]} </rating> 

Prompt F.8: CoT Evaluation Rubric (Style) 

You are an expert evaluator assessing the Style of an AI-generated Chain of Thought (CoT). Style measures whether the CoT uses first-person narrative that mimics natural thought processes with logical flow. Inputs: - Policy: {policy} - Conversation: {conversation} - Your response: {assistant_response} - Chain of Thought: {cot} Task: Evaluate CoT Style on a scale of 1-10. Rating Scale: 1: Direct copy from policy, no narrative elements 2: Mostly extracted content, minimal original phrasing 3: Some narrative attempt, heavily reliant on policy wording 4: Basic narrative structure, lacks coherence and flow 5: Clear narrative attempt, occasional lapses into direct extraction 6: Consistent narrative style, could improve logical progression 7: Good narrative flow with clear reasoning, minor improvements needed 8: Strong narrative style with logical and coherent thought process 9: Excellent narrative with clear reasoning and smooth transitions 10: Exceptional narrative style, superior logical flow and original insights Evaluation Process: <cot_evaluation> 1. Quote CoT parts demonstrating narrative style or lack thereof 2. Analyze logical flow by numbering each thought step 3. Identify unnecessary elements or direct policy extractions 4. Discuss alignment with policy and conversation context 5. Compare CoT content with policy and conversation for accuracy and relevance 

18 6. Provide specific action items for improving style </cot_evaluation> <analysis> [Concise analysis of CoT style] </analysis> <rating> \boxed{[1-10]} </rating> 

F.3 Reward Prompts 

Prompt F.9: User Request to Required Policies 

You are an AI tasked with identifying which policies are relevant to a given user request in a conversation. You will be provided with a list of atomic policies, a conversation history, and the last user request. Your job is to determine which policies need to be considered when formulating a response to the user 's request. First, here is the list of atomic policies: <policies> {policies} </policies> Now, here is the conversation history between the user and the agent: <conversation_history> {conversation_history} </conversation_history> The last user request is: <user_request> {user_request} </user_request> To complete this task, follow these steps: 1. Carefully read and understand each policy in the list. 2. Review the conversation history to understand the context of the interaction. 3. Analyze the last user request in relation to the policies. 4. Identify which policies are directly relevant to responding to the user 's request. 5. Remember that the agent does not deviate from the policies at all, so be very selective in choosing relevant policies. When you have determined which policies are relevant, output only the IDs of those policies. Your output should be a comma-separated list of policy IDs, without any additional explanation or justification. For example, if policies AP001, RP001, and RP002 are relevant, your output should look like this: <answer> AP001,RP001,RP002 

</answer> If no policies are relevant, output: <answer> None </answer> Important: Your final output should consist of only the <answer> tag containing either the list of policy IDs or "None". Do not include any explanations, reasoning, or additional text in your final output. 

Prompt F.10: Generated CoT to Mentioned Policies 

You will be given a list of atomic policies and an agent-generated response. Your task is to identify which policies are mentioned in the response and output their corresponding IDs. First, here is the list of atomic policies: <policies> {policies} </policies> Now, here is the agent-generated response that you need to analyze: <response> {response} </response> To complete this task, follow these steps: 1. Carefully read through the list of atomic policies and familiarize yourself with their content. 2. Read the agent-generated response thoroughly. 3. For each policy in the list, determine if its content is mentioned or alluded to in the response. Pay attention to both explicit mentions and implicit references to the policy 's content. 4. Keep track of the IDs of the policies that are mentioned in the response. 5. After analyzing the entire response, compile a list of the policy IDs that were mentioned. Output your findings in the following format: <mentioned_policies> [List the IDs of the mentioned policies here, separated by commas] </mentioned_policies> If no policies were mentioned in the response, output: <mentioned_policies> None </mentioned_policies> 

19 Important: Your final output should consist of only the <mentioned_policies> tag containing either the list of policy IDs or "None". Do not include any explanations, reasoning, or additional text in your final output. 

Prompt F.11: Generated CoT to Hallucinated Policies 

You will be given a list of atomic policies and an agent-generated response. Your task is to identify any policies mentioned in the response that are not present in the given list of atomic policies. These are considered hallucinated policies. First, here is the list of atomic policies: <atomic_policies> {policies} </atomic_policies> Now, here is the agent 's response: <agent_response> {response} </agent_response> To complete this task, follow these steps: 1. Carefully read through the list of atomic policies. 2. Read the agent 's response thoroughly. 3. Identify any policy statements or references in the agent 's response. 4. Compare each identified policy in the response to the list of atomic policies. 5. If a policy mentioned in the response is not present in the atomic policies list, consider it a hallucinated policy. For each hallucinated policy you identify, output it on a new line. The format should be as follows: <hallucinated_policies> hallucinated policy 1 hallucinated policy 2 </hallucinated_policies> If there are no hallucinated policies, output: <hallucinated_policies> None </hallucinated_policies> Important: Your final output should consist of only the <hallucinated_policies> tag containing either the list of hallucinated policies or "None". Do not include any explanations, reasoning, or additional text in your final output. 

Prompt F.12: Turn Reward 

You are given one ground truth response and one predicted response. You have to evaluate the predicted response based on completeness, correctness. The predicted response does not have to be exactly the same as the ground truth response, but it should contain the same information, without any misinformation. Score the predicted response from 0 to 10. Ground truth response: {gt_response} Predicted response: {pd_response} Please reason step by step, and put your final answer within \\boxed{{}}. 

Prompt F.13: Template for Format Reward 

Assistant turn 

<think>Policy-recall based Thinking</think> {{final-response}} 

Tool-Call turn 

<think>Policy-recall based Thinking</think> {{tool-call-json}} 

G Use of AI Assistance 

The authors used Cursor 2 during development and ChatGPT 3 for proofreading and refining the final manuscript. All content provided to these tools was originally created by the authors. 

> 2

https://cursor.com 

> 3

https://chatgpt.com/ 

20