Title: Physics-informed machine learning for reconstruction of dynamical systems with invariant measure score matching

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2601.12675v1

Published Time: Wed, 21 Jan 2026 02:23:44 GMT

Number of Pages: 33

Markdown Content:
# Physics-informed machine learning for reconstruction of dynamical systems with invariant measure score matching 

# Yongsheng Chen * Suddhasattwa Das † Wei Guo ‡ Xinghui Zhong §

# January 21, 2026 

Abstract 

In this paper, we develop a novel mesh-free framework, termed physics-informed neural networks with invariant measure score matching (PINN-IMSM), for reconstructing dynamical systems from unlabeled point-cloud data that captures the system’s invariant measure. The invariant density satisfies the steady-state Fokker-Planck (FP) equation. We reformulate this equation in terms of its score function (the gradient of the log-density), which is estimated directly from data via denoising score matching, thereby bypassing explicit density estima-tion. This learned score is then embedded into a physics-informed neural network (PINN) to reconstruct the drift velocity field under the resulting score-based FP equation. The mesh-free nature of PINN allows the framework to scale e ffi ciently to higher dimensions, avoiding the curse of dimensionality inherent in mesh-based methods. To address the ill-posed nature of high-dimensional inverse problems, we further recast the problem as a PDE-constrained opti-mization that seeks the minimal-energy velocity field. Under suitable conditions, we prove that this problem admits a unique solution that depends continuously on the score function. The constrained formulation is solved using a stochastic augmented Lagrangian method. Numeri-cal experiments on representative dynamical systems, including the Van der Pol oscillator, an active swimmer in an anharmonic trap, chaotic Lorenz-63 and Lorenz-96 systems, demonstrate that PINN-IMSM accurately recovers invariant measures and reconstructs faithful dynamical behavior, successfully handling problems in up to five dimensions. 

Keywords: Dynamical system learning, invariant measure, score matching, physics-informed neu-ral networks (PINNs). 

> *

School of Mathematical Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310027, China. 22035024@zju.edu.cn 

> †

Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX, 70409, USA. suddas@ttu.edu .

> ‡

Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX, 70409, USA. 

weimath.guo@ttu.edu .

> §

Corresponding author. School of Mathematical Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310027, China. 

zhongxh@zju.edu.cn 

1

> arXiv:2601.12675v1 [math.NA] 19 Jan 2026

# 1 Introduction 

Reconstructing dynamical systems from observational data is a fundamental task across science and engineering, central to understanding and predicting complex phenomena from chaotic attrac-tors and turbulent flows to pattern formation and neural activity. The problem involves finding a mathematical model, often parameterized in a trainable manner, such that its simulated behavior aligns with the observed data. Recent data-driven machine learning approaches have significantly advanced this field, providing flexible frameworks for systems with incomplete or noisy observa-tions. Neural ordinary di ff erential equations (ODEs) [1–4] and sparse identification of nonlinear dynamics (SINDy) [5–7] have proven e ff ective for dynamical system identification. However, these methods adopt a Lagrangian perspective and rely heavily on accurate trajectory data to es-timate derivatives, limiting their applicability when temporal information is sparse or unavailable. A scenario for recovering unknown dynamical systems from data with missing time labels was considered in [8], where the data are assumed to lie on a one-dimensional manifold. Their method minimizes the sliced-Wasserstein distance between samples generated by neural ODEs and train-ing data, employing a trajectory segmentation technique to facilitate training. Nevertheless, the approach remains Lagrangian and is limited to lower-dimensional manifolds. In this paper, we focus on the scenario where observational data are provided as a point cloud consisting of samples from an underlying dynamical system, but lack reliable temporal labels due to slow or unrecorded sampling. Such data frequently appear in fields including molecular dy-namics, biology, healthcare, medical research, and numerical weather prediction. For dynamical systems, the distribution of states converges over time to a time-independent limit known as in-variant measure . The observational data, though devoid of explicit timing, provides an empirical approximation of this invariant measure, which in turn encodes key information about the system’s dynamic law. Classical Lagrangian methods, which rely on time-labeled trajectories to estimate derivatives, are ine ff ective in this label-deficient setting. To address the challenge, an Eulerian approach has been developed in [9, 10] to learn the dynamics from such data. This approach formulates the reconstruction as a partial di ff erential equation (PDE) inverse problem, which infers the unknown velocity field directly from data by imposing the steady-state Fokker–Planck (FP) equation as a physical constraint, thereby circum-venting the need for time-labeled trajectories. The method proceeds in three steps. First, the invariant density is approximated empirically by binning the data into a histogram ρ⋆. This in-variant density is known to satisfy the steady-state FP equation. Second, a finite volume scheme is employed to compute the solution ρ(v(θ)) of the FP equation, for a velocity field v(θ), which is parameterized by a neural network with trainable parameters θ. Third, v(θ) is optimized using a gradient-based method to minimize the loss function J(θ) : = D(ρ(v(θ)) , ρ ⋆), where D denotes a metric or divergence between probability measures. This framework has been validated on several benchmark examples. However, because it relies on a mesh-based PDE solver, it su ff ers from the curse of the dimensionality and is practically limited to problems of low dimensions ( d ≤ 3). The practical scalability of the aforementioned mesh-based Eulerian method is limited by their reliance on mesh-based discretization and the need to repeatedly solve the governing PDE, which becomes computationally prohibitive in higher dimensions. This limitation has motivated the development of mesh-free learning paradigms that encode the governing PDE structure directly directly within neural network parameterizations while maintaining di ff erentiability for gradient-based optimization. Physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) [11–15] provide one such frame-2work by embedding the equations as soft or hard constraints in the training loss, enabling param-eter /field identification without an explicit mesh-based PDE solver. Another direction is to use deep operator networks, such as DeepONet [16], Fourier neural operators [17], and graph neural operators [18], which learn mappings between function spaces to recover unknown parameters from observational data. While powerful, these operator methods typically demand large volumes of high-quality training data [19, 20]. Recent works that incorporate PDE constraints into such operator-learning frameworks, aim to reduce data requirements and enhance generalization capa-bilities [21, 22]. Motivated by the limitations of existing methods, we propose a novel mesh-free framework termed PINN with invariant measure score matching (PINN-IMSM), designed to reconstruct dy-namical systems from data without explicit temporal labels. A key step is to reformulate the stationary FP equation in terms of the score function, i.e., the gradient of the log-density of the invariant measure, yielding a score-based stationary FP equation. PINN-IMSM first uses denois-ing score matching [23, 24] to learn this score function directly from unlabeled observational data, avoiding explicit density estimation. The learned score is subsequently embedded into a PINN to reconstruct the underlying velocity field by enforcing the physics constraint derived from the score-based FP equation. To overcome the ill-posedness challenge in the standard PINN approach, we further formu-late the reconstruction as a PDE-constrained optimization problem, seeking the minimal-energy velocity field that satisfies the FP equation. We prove that, under suitable conditions, this PDE-constrained optimization problem admits a unique solution, and that the solution is continuous with respect to the score function. This constrained formulation is solved e ffi ciently via the stochas-tic augmented Lagrangian method [25]. Numerical experiments demonstrate that the proposed PINN-IMSM method achieves accurate and stable reconstruction of dynamical systems from ob-servational data, successfully handling problems in dimensions up to five, thereby significantly surpassing the scalability of existing mesh-based and trajectory-based methods. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce background on stochastic di ff erential equations, invariant measures, the FP equations, and the score estimation and PINNs. Section 3 is devoted to the details of the proposed PINN-IMSM framework. Section 4 presents numerical results validating the method’s performance and robustness. Conclusions and directions of future work are discussed in Section 5. 

# 2 Background 

# 2.1 Stochastic di ff erential equations, invariant measures, and Fokker-Planck equations 

Consider the stochastic di ff erential equation (SDE) of the form dXt = v (Xt) d t + Γ (Xt) d Wt, (2.1) where Xt is a d-dimensional stochastic process with the state space Ω ⊂ Rd being a bounded Lipschitz domain, v : Ω → Rd is the drift velocity, Wt is a standard m-dimensional Brownian motion, and Γ : Ω → Rd×m is the d × m-dimensional di ff usion coe ffi cient matrix. We assume v and 3Γ are Lipschitz continuous. The solution to (2.1) is given by the integral equation: 

Xt = X0 +

Z t

> 0

v (Xs) d s +

Z t

> 0

Γ (Xs) d Ws.

If the initial condition X0 is random with a probability density ρ0, then the SDE induces a flow of probability densities ρ(x, t). The evolution of this density is governed by the FP equation [26–28] ∂ρ (x, t)

∂t = −∇ · (ρ(x, t)v(x)) + ∇ · ∇ · (Σ(x)ρ(x, t))  ≜ F ρ(x, t), (2.2) with the initial condition ρ(x, 0) = ρ0(x) and the constraints: 

ρ(x, t) ≥ 0,

Z

> Ω

ρ(x, t)d x = 1. (2.3) Here, F is the FP operator, and Σ is the di ff usion coe ffi cient matrix with its entries given by 

Σi, j(x) : = 12

hΓ(x)Γ(x)T i  

> i,j

= 12

DΓi(x), Γj(x)E 

> Rm

,

where Γi(x) denotes the i-th row of the matrix Γ(x). The matrix Σ is symmetric and positive semi-definite. To ensure probability conservation within Ω, FP equation (2.2) is supplemented with homogeneous Neumann (reflecting) boundary conditions: (−v(x)ρ(x, t) + ∇ · (Σ(x)ρ(x, t))) · n(x) = 0, x ∈ ∂Ω, (2.4) where n(x) is the outward unit normal to ∂Ω.A density ρ(x) is stationary or invariant if it remains unchanged under this transformation, i.e., 

F ρ = 0 subject to the constraints (2.3). This represents a statistical equilibrium that balances the deterministic drift and stochastic di ff usion. Furthermore, an invariant density ρ defines an invariant probability measure μ on the phase space by μ(U) = R 

> U

ρ(x)d x for any measurable set U ⊂ Ω. This measure is invariant in the sense that if X0 is distributed according to μ, then Xt is also distributed according to μ for all t > 0. Thus, the probability of the process being in any set U remains constant over time. The determination of these stationary densities is of significant practical importance, as they directly identify high- and low-probability regions in the phase space. In this paper, we focus on the scenario of constant, isotropic di ff usion, where the di ff usion matrix takes the form Σ(x) = DI , where D is a positive constant known as the di ff usion coe ffi cient, and I is the identity matrix. Consequently, the general SDE (2.1) simplifies to dXt = v(Xt) d t + √2D dWt, (2.5) which represents a dynamical system driven by isotropic white noise of strength D. In the zero-noise limit D → 0+, the system reduces to the continuity equation modeling the probability flow of the ODE given by ˙ x = v(x). For systems exhibiting stochastic stability [29–31], the invariant measure depends continuously on the noise level. This property, while di ffi cult to establish theo-retically, is widely observed empirically. For such systems, the constant isotropic di ff usion model ensures the stationary distribution remains close to that of the noise-free counterpart. 4The corresponding FP equation (2.2) then simplifies to 

∂ρ (x, t)

∂t = −∇ · (ρ(x, t)v(x)) + D∇2ρ(x, t), x ∈ Ω, (2.6) associated with the boundary condition (D∇ρ − ρ v) · n = 0 on ∂Ω. (2.7) Under certain conditions [26], the invariant density ρ(x) of (2.6) exists and satisfies 

∇ · (ρ(x)v(x)) = D∇2ρ(x), x ∈ Ω. (2.8) This formulation implies that if the invariant density ρ(x) can be estimated from data, the under-lying velocity field v can be reconstructed by solving the inverse problem defined by (2.8). Our proposed method is developed within this paradigm. 

# 2.2 Score estimation 

The inverse problem posed by Equation (2.8) requires an accurate estimate of the invariant density 

ρ(x) from data. A critical first step is therefore to obtain a robust approximation of this invariant measure. In [10], this measure is approximated using the occupation measure , which is the em-pirical distribution obtained by binning observed points into histogram. However, this binning ap-proach is well-known to su ff er from the curse of dimensionality, rendering it impractical for high-dimensional problems [32]. To overcome this limitation, we employ score matching techniques, which have demonstrated remarkable success in high-dimensional density estimation [23, 24]. For any continuously di ff erentiable probability density function ρ(x), the associated score func-tion s(x) is defined as 

s(x) = ∇x log ρ(x). (2.9) Estimating the score function is often more tractable than direct density estimation, as it circum-vents the computation of intractable normalizing constants [23, 24]. Moreover, the score function provides crucial information about the geometry of the underlying probability distribution and enables various downstream applications, including sample generation through Langevin Monte Carlo dynamics and gradient-based optimization procedures [33, 34]. A score network sθ(x), parameterized with trainable parameters θ, is used to approximate the ground-truth score function ∇x log ρ(x). The natural objective is to minimize the expected squared error 12 Eρ(x)|| sθ(x)−∇ x log ρ(x)|| 22, which defines the classical score matching framework [23]. How-ever, this formulation cannot be applied directly because the true score function is unknown. To overcome this challenge, numerous e ff ective score matching variants have been developed in the literature. A widely used approach is denoising score matching [35], which has become a cornerstone technique in modern generative modeling. Given observed data x ∈ Ω from the unknown density ρ(x), the main idea of the denoising score matching is to first perturb it with additive noise according to a conditional distribution pσ( ˜ x|x), where σ controls the noise level. Score matching is then applied to estimate the score of the noise-perturbed distribution pσ( ˜ x) ≜R 

> Ω

pσ( ˜ x|x)ρ(x)d x. As proven in [35], this is equivalent to minimizing the objective: 12Eρ(x)Epσ( ˜ x|x)

h∥sθ( ˜ x) − ∇ ˜x log pσ( ˜ x|x)∥22

i , (2.10) 5where the expectation over ρ(x) is approximated using given data samples x. The theoretical study in [35] ensures that, under appropriate regularity conditions, the optimal network sθ∗ (x) that minimizes this objective (2.10) satisfies 

sθ∗ (x) = ∇x log pσ(x), almost surely . (2.11) When the noise level σ is su ffi ciently small such that pσ( ˜ x) ≈ ρ( ˜ x), the optimal score network yields a close approximation to the true score function: 

sθ∗ (x) = ∇x log pσ(x) ≈ ∇ x log ρ(x).

Despite its theoretical appeal, the single-scale denoising approach in (2.10) often exhibits un-satisfactory performance in practice, particularly in low density regions where the signal-to-noise ratio is unfavorable [36]. This issue is addressed by the multi-scale denoising approach [36], which perturbs data with multiple noise levels and trains a single conditional score network to estimate scores across all noise scales simultaneously. This technique has since become a standard in score-based generative modeling. The multi-scale denoising approach involves selecting a geometric sequence of noise scales 

{σi}Li=1, such that σ1

σ2

= · · · = σL−1

σL

= γ > 1,

where γ is a fixed ratio. To determine the parameters of this sequence ( σ1, γ, and L), we follow the systematic approach proposed in [37], which is based on two criteria: 

Criterion 1. Set the largest noise scale σ1 to the maximum pairwise Euclidean distance among all training data points. This ensures the Gaussian noise distribution at the largest scale adequately covers the entire support of the data. 

Criterion 2. Choose the ratio γ such that it satisfies 

Φ( √2d(γ − 1) + 3γ) − Φ( √2d(γ − 1) − 3γ) ≈ 0.5,

where Φ denotes the standard normal cumulative distribution function. This ensures su ffi cient overlap between consecutive noise levels for e ff ective training. The number of scales L is then chosen such that the smallest noise scale σL is above a threshold (typically σL ≈ 0.01), resulting in a well-conditioned noise sequence {σi}Li=1.At each scale σi, the data is perturbed using a Gaussian distribution pσi ( ˜ x | x) = N( ˜ x | x, σ 2 

> i

I), yielding the noise-perturbed distribution pσi ( ˜ x) ≜ R pσi ( ˜ x | x)ρ(x)d x. A single conditional score network sθ(x, σ ) is then trained to jointly approximate the scores of all perturbed distributions, i.e., 

sθ(x, σ i) ≈ ∇ x log pσi (x) for all i. For a fixed noise level σi, the denoising score matching objective derived from (2.10) is 12Eρ(x)Epσi ( ˜ x|x)

"

sθ ( ˜ x, σ i) + ˜x − x

σ2

> i
> 22

#

.

These individual objectives are combined into a unified loss function for all noise scales: 

Ls = 12L

> L

X

> i=1

λ(σi) Eρ(x)Epσi ( ˜ x|x)

"

sθ ( ˜ x, σ i) + ˜x − x

σ2

> i
> 22

#

, (2.12) 6where λ(σi) > 0 are scaling coe ffi cients. Empirically, it is observed that ∥sθ(x, σ )∥2 ∝ 1/σ for optimally trained networks [36], which motivates the choice λ(σi) = σ2 

> i

to balance the loss across scales. Substituting this weighting yields the final objective: 

Ls = 12L

> L

X

> i=1

Eρ(x)Epσi ( ˜ x|x)

"

σisθ ( ˜ x, σ i) + ˜x − x

σi

> 22

#

. (2.13) To facilitate learning across di ff erent noise scales and ensure numerical stability, we employ a parameterization of the conditional score network: sθ(x, σ ) = sθ(x)/σ , where sθ(x) is an uncon-ditional score network. This reparameterization mitigates the numerical instabilities that arise as 

σ → 0 [37], while the lower bound σL ≈ 0.01 provides additional regularization. 

# 2.3 Physics-informed neural networks 

This section reviews the framework of PINNs [11] for solving PDEs. PINNs provide a powerful, mesh-free alternative to traditional numerical methods, particularly for high-dimensional problems and complex geometries. Consider a PDE of the general form 

Nu(x) = f(x), x ∈ Ω, (2.14) where N is a nonlinear di ff erential operator, u : Rd → Rm is the unknown solution field, f : Rd →

Rm is a prescribed source function, and Ω ⊂ Rd is the computational domain. Traditional numeri-cal methods, such as finite di ff erence and finite element approaches, rely on spatial discretizations that can become computationally expensive for high-dimensional problems due to the curse of di-mensionality [38, 39]. In contrast, PINNs [11] employ a neural network ˆ u(x; θ) to approximate the solution directly, where θ denotes the collection of all trainable network parameters. The key innovation of PINNs is the incorporation of physical constraints into the training process via auto-matic di ff erentiation [40], enabling the network to learn solutions that satisfy both the governing equations and available measurement data. The framework utilizes two distinct point sets: observational data {(yi, ui)}Nu 

> i=1

(which may be sparse or absent) and collocation points {xj}N f 

> j=1

sampled throughout the domain Ω. The training process minimizes a composite physics-informed loss function: 

L = ω1Ldata + ω2LPDE , (2.15) with the data fidelity term 

Ldata = 1

NuNuX

> i=1

∥ ˆu(yi; θ) − ui∥22,

and the physics-based residual term 

LPDE = 1

NfN fX

> j=1

∥N ˆu(xj; θ) − f(xj)∥22.

The weighting coe ffi cients ω1 and ω2 balance contributions of data fitting and physics enforcement. 7The optimization of the loss function (2.15) is typically performed using gradient-based algo-rithms such as the Adam optimizer [41] or L-BFGS [42], leveraging the automatic di ff erentiation capabilities of modern deep learning frameworks. The trained network ˆ u(x; θ∗) provides a mesh-free approximation of the solution that can be evaluated at arbitrary points within the domain. Beyond forward problems, PINNs have demonstrated remarkable e ff ectiveness in addressing in-verse problems, where unknown parameters or functions in the governing equations are inferred from limited data [43–45]. In this work, we leverage this capability to address the challenging task of reconstructing unknown velocity v in (2.8) from observed trajectory data. 

# 3 PINN-IMSM: PINN with invariant measure score matching 

This section introduce PINN-IMSM, a novel mesh-free machine learning framework that combines PINN with invariant measure score matching to reconstruct dynamical systems from noisy trajec-tory observations. The key innovation of PINN-IMSM lies in its ability to learn velocity fields without requiring explicit time labels, making it particularly suitable for real-world applications where temporal information is incomplete or unavailable. Our approach addresses three funda-mental challenges in dynamical system reconstruction: (i) handling intrinsic noise in trajectory data, (ii) circumventing the curse of dimensionality inherent in traditional mesh-based methods, and (iii) ensuring well-posed reconstruction in high-dimensional spaces. 

# 3.1 Problem reformulation and method overview 

The theoretical foundation of PINN-IMSM rests on utilizing the steady-state FP equation (2.8) as a forward model to characterize the invariant measure generated by the observed trajectories. A central component of PINN-IMSM is the use of score functions rather than density functions for invariant measure estimation. We reformulate the steady-state FP equation (2.8) by substituting the score definition (2.9), yielding 

s(x) · v(x) + ∇ · v(x) = D |s(x)|2 + ∇ · s(x) , x ∈ Ω. (3.1) In this formulation, the di ff usion term serves a dual purpose: it accommodates intrinsic noise while preventing overfitting to noise components in the velocity field v(x), and simultaneously provides natural regularization. This approach distinguishes PINN-IMSM from existing mesh-based finite volume approaches [10] and enables the e ff ective capture of complex dynamical behaviors in high-dimensional spaces. Given trajectory measurements {eXi}Ni=1, interpreted as samples from stochastic dynamical sys-tems (2.1), PINN-IMSM reconstructs the associated velocity field v(x) through a two-stage pro-cess: 

• Stage 1: Train a score network sθ1 (x, σ L) using denoising score matching to approximate the score function s(x). 

• Stage 2: Reconstruct the velocity field v(x) through a physics-informed approach based on Equation (3.1). 83.2 Score matching for invariant measures 

The first stage of our methodology employs a noise-conditional score network sθ1 (x, σ L) to ap-proximate the score function s(x) = ∇x log ρ(x), where ρ(x) is the density of the invariant measure and θ1 denotes the trainable parameters. The network is trained using the multi-scale denoising score matching framework detailed in Section 2.2 by minimizing the loss function (2.13) across a well-conditioned geometric sequence of noise levels {σi}Li=1.We treat the trajectory measurements {eXi}Ni=1 as time-agnostic samples from the invariant mea-sure, forming the empirical distribution bρN B 1

> N

PNi=1 δeXi on Ω, where δeXi denotes the Dirac mass at eXi. During training, we repeatedly sample data points x ∼ bρN , pick a noise level σi from the fixed noise sequence {σi}Li=1, and draw a standard Gaussian perturbation ξ ∼ N (0, Id). For each pair ( x, σ i) we then form the perturbed sample ˜x = x + σiξ,

and assemble mini-batches of such triplets ( x, ˜x, σ i) to evaluate and minimize the multi-scale de-noising score matching loss (2.13). The key insight is the selection of a su ffi ciently small smallest noise level σL such that the perturbed density approximates the density of the invariant measure, i.e., pσL (x) ≈ ρ(x). This choice, combined with the theoretical guarantees of score matching (2.11), leads to the following approximation: 

sθ∗ 

> 1

(x, σ L) ≈ ∇ x log pσL (x) ≈ ∇ x log ρ(x) = s(x), (3.2) which provides PINN-IMSM with a robust estimate of the score function s(x) for the underly-ing dynamical system. To ensure compatibility with automatic di ff erentiation in the subsequent physics-informed learning stage, the score network utilizes smooth activation functions, specifi-cally the swish activation [46]. With the reliable estimate sθ∗ 

> 1

(x, σ L) ≈ s(x) obtained, we proceed to the second stage, which leverages the score-based reformulation (3.1) to recover the underlying velocity field. 

# 3.3 PINN-based velocity field reconstruction 

The second stage of PINN-IMSM constructs a neural network vθ2 (x) parameterized by θ2 to recon-struct the velocity field v(x) using the score estimate obtained in the first stage. 

3.3.1 The ill-posedness challenge in the standard PINN approach 

We begin by reformulating Equation (3.1) in compact operator form: 

eN(s(x), v(x)) = s(x) · v(x) + ∇ · v(x) − D |s(x)|2 + ∇ · s(x) = 0. (3.3) The standard PINN approach trains the neural network vθ2 (x) by minimizing the physics-informed loss function over the trajectory measurements {eXi}Ni=1:

LPDE = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

∥ eN(sθ∗ 

> 1

(eXi, σ L), v(eXi)) ∥22, (3.4) 9Figure 3.1: Velocity field reconstruction from trajectory data without explicit time labels. From trajectory measurements (left), we first reconstruct the score function via denoising score matching (middle). This reconstructed score is then integrated into the PINN framework to infer the velocity field across the state space (right). where sθ∗ 

> 1

(eXi, σ L) is the pre-trained score estimate. The optimized network vθ∗ 

> 2

(x) then approximates the velocity field v(x), as illustrated in Figure 3.1. Despite this straightforward formulation, the standard PINN approach faces several challenges. The primary issue is ill-posedness: Equation (3.1) may admit multiple velocity field solutions v(x)for a given score function s(x), particularly in high-dimensional settings. Furthermore, the absence of explicit data-fitting terms in the loss function complicates optimization, making minimization of (3.4) particularly di ffi cult [47, 48]. These limitations motivate our reformulation as a constrained optimization problem to ensure well-posedness and stability. 

3.3.2 Ensuring well-posedness: PDE-constrained optimization approach 

To address the ill-posedness of the velocity reconstruction problem identified in the previous sec-tion, we reformulate it as the following PDE-constrained optimization problem: minimize  

> v

|| v(x)|| 2

subject to eN(s(x), v(x)) = 0,

(3.5) where || v(x)|| 2 = R 

> Ω

|v(x)|2 dx. This formulation selects the minimal-energy solution among all feasible solutions consistent with the score-based FP constraint. The well-posedness of this constrained optimization approach is established by the follow-ing theorem. The required preliminaries including definitions of the relevant function spaces and norms, together with a complete proof are provided in Appendix A. 

Theorem 3.1 (Well-posedness of (3.5)) . Assume s ∈ W1,∞(Ω; Rd) and that qs = |s|2 + ∇ · s ≥

0 almost everywhere in Ω. Then the constrained optimization problem (3.5) admits a unique 

minimizer v∗. Moreover, the solution map s 7 → v∗ is locally Lipschitz with respect to the W1,∞-metric on s and the L2-metric on v, i.e., there exist a neighborhood U of s and a constant C > 0such that, for any es ∈ U, the corresponding minimizer ev∗ satisfies 

∥v∗ − ev∗∥L2(Ω) ≤ C ∥s − es∥W1,∞(Ω).

10 Remark 3.1. The condition qs ≥ 0 is su ffi cient is su ffi cient for the theorem. The conclusion remains valid under the weaker condition ∥q− 

> s

∥L∞(Ω) < C−2 

> P

, where q− 

> s

(x) = max {− qs(x), 0} and CP

is the Poincar´ e constant for H1 

> ⋄

(Ω). This theorem guarantees that the minimal-energy solution exists, is unique, and depends con-tinuously on the score function s. The Lipschitz continuity ensures that the reconstruction of the velocity field is stable with respect to perturbations in the score function. Specifically, if we ap-proximate the true score s by an estimate es obtained from data (e.g., via score matching), the error in the reconstructed velocity field ∥v∗ − ev∗∥L2 is linearly controlled by the estimation error 

∥s − es∥W1,∞ . This provides a theoretical guarantee that an accurate score estimate leads to an ac-curate reconstruction of the underlying dynamics, which is crucial when the score is learned from finite samples. In practice, we work with the data-driven surrogate of (3.5) obtained by replacing the true score 

s with its learned approximation sθ∗ 

> 1

:minimize  

> v

∥v(x)∥2

subject to eN(sθ∗ 

> 1

(x), v(x)) = 0. (3.6) Given that neural networks with smooth activation functions yield Cm-smooth approximations, the learned score function sθ∗ 

> 1

(x) ∈ Cm(Ω) satisfies the regularity assumptions of Theorem 3.1. Thus, the surrogate problem (3.6) admits a unique solution bv and enjoys Lipschitz stability. In par-ticular, an O(ε) error in sθ∗ 

> 1

(measured in W1,∞) leads to an O(ε) error in the reconstructed velocity field (measured in L2). As learning improves sθ∗ 

> 1

and the minimal-energy constraint regularizes residual high-frequency noise, bv converges to the ideal solution v∗.The theoretical foundation for our approach leverages the Universal Approximation Theorem [49, 50], ensuring that neural networks with su ffi ciently smooth activation functions can approxi-mate any smooth function with arbitrary precision. Thus, solving problem (3.6) using neural net-work architectures provides a robust computational approach to approximating the velocity field solution v∗.

3.3.3 Numerical implementation: stochastic augmented Lagrangian method 

With the well-posedness of the constrained optimization problem (3.6) established in Theorem 3.1, we now consider its numerical implementation using neural networks. Several approaches have been proposed for constrained learning in physics-informed settings including soft penalty meth-ods [11], penalty-based hard constraint formulations [51], adversarial training frameworks [52], and stochastic augmented Lagrangian methods [25]. Among these, we adopt the stochastic aug-mented Lagrangian approach introduced in [25], originally developed for physics-constrained training of encoder-decoder networks to approximate the Fokker-Planck-Landau collision oper-ator. This approach builds upon the classical augmented Lagrangian framework, originally known as the method of multipliers and first proposed by [53] and [54] for nonlinear constrained opti-mization problems. We adapt the stochastic augmented Lagrangian approach to our score-based PDE-constrained optimization formulation (3.6). Rather than approximating a known physical operator while pre-serving conservation laws, we aim to reconstruct an unknown minimum-energy velocity field from unlabeled trajectory data through a PDE constraint involving a separately learned score function. 11 Specifically, the augmented Lagrangian approach reformulates the PDE-constrained optimiza-tion problem (3.6) into a sequence of unconstrained optimization problems indexed by k:minimize 

> θ2

L(θ2, λ k, μ k), (3.7) with L being the augmented Lagrangian merit function: 

L(θ2, λ k, μ k) = ∥vθ2 ∥2 + λk eN(θ2) + μk

2 ∥ eN(θ2)∥2, (3.8) where λk is the Lagrange multiplier and μk is the augmented Lagrangian penalty factor. Here, 

eN(θ2) : = eN(sθ∗ 

> 1

, vθ2 ) denotes the PDE residual from (3.3), evaluated using the score estimate sθ∗

> 1

obtained in the first stage and the parameterized velocity field vθ2 . We remark that for the con-strained formulation, the original PINN loss (3.4) is no longer minimized directly. Instead, the physics residual appears as a constraint in (3.6), which is handled through the augmented La-grangian framework in (3.7)-(3.8). The stochastic augmented Lagrangian method employs a two-level nested loop structure: the inner loop uses stochastic gradient descent (SGD) to solve the unconstrained optimization problem (3.7), while the outer loop updates Lagrange multipliers and penalty parameters in (3.8). 

Inner-loop optimization via stochastic gradient descent We solve the unconstrained optimiza-tion problem (3.7) using mini-batch SGD, adapting the approach from [25] to our PDE-constrained setting. Classical augmented Lagrangian methods solve the inner optimization problem (3.7) to a gradient-norm tolerance wk, i.e., 

∥∇ θ2 L(θ2,k, λ k, μ k)∥2 ≤ wk, (3.9) with wk gradually tightened as the algorithm converges toward the constrained solution. However, this criterion is impractical in stochastic settings for two reasons: first, accurately estimating the optimality norm ∥∇ θ2 L∥ 2 is infeasible with stochastic mini-batch gradients; second, gradient norms do not serve as meaningful termination criteria in machine learning, where prediction accuracy of the neural network is the primary objective. Instead of checking convergence via gradient norms, the SGD algorithm is configured to iterate through the entire training dataset once per outer-loop iteration. This yields a fixed number of SGD iterations in each inner loop: 

Niter = NNb

, (3.10) where N is the training dataset size, and Nb is the batch size. We further introduce a user-specified parameter Naug that controls the number of outer iterations performed for each random permuta-tion of the training dataset. This enables multiple optimization passes over identical datasets and batches before new random batches are generated, with each pass solving a distinct inner optimiza-tion problem characterized by updated Lagrange multiplier λk and penalty factor μk.

Outer-loop updating of multipliers and penalties We update the Lagrange multiplier λk and penalty parameter μk in the outer loop based on the progress of inner-loop optimization. Traditional 12 augmented Lagrangian methods employ dynamic constraint tolerances to guide these updates, pre-supposing that each inner optimization problem consistently achieves the required dynamic toler-ance. However, since our inner-loop solves the optimization problem via SGD with a fixed number of iterations, such convergence cannot be guaranteed. We adopt a criterion based on su ffi cient reduction in PDE constraint violation, following the approach in [25]. Specifically, the multiplier is updated when the current PDE residual shows su ffi cient improvement relative to the best value recorded thus far: 

∥ eN(θk+12 )∥2 ≤ η∥ eNbest ∥2, (3.11) where η ∈ (0 , 1) is a reduction factor and eNbest tracks the smallest PDE residual achieved during training. When this condition is satisfied, the multiplier follows the standard update: 

λk+1 = λk + μk eN(θk+12 ). (3.12) Otherwise, the penalty parameter is increased: 

μk+1 = min( aμk, μ max ), (3.13) where a > 1 is a scalar parameter, and μmax is an upper bound to prevent numerical instability. We end this subsection by summarizing the complete stochastic augmented Lagrangian algo-rithm. First, we specify the number of random permutations of the training dataset, Nshu ffl e. Then, for each permutation, we perform Naug outer iterations; each outer iteration consists of: 

• Inner loop: Niter SGD updates of the neural network parameters θ2.

• Outer update: Update the Lagrange multipliers and penalty terms based on the constraint satisfaction criterion (3.11). 

# 3.4 Summary of the PINN-IMSM framework 

Algorithm 1 outlines the complete PINN-IMSM procedure for reconstructing the velocity field 

v(x) from the score-based formulation (3.1). The method proceeds in two sequential stages, using only the trajectory measurements {eXi}Ni=1 as training data: 

• Stage 1 (score estimation): The score network sθ1 (x) is trained on the trajectory data by minimizing the multi-scale denoising score matching objective (2.13). This yields the ap-proximation sθ∗ 

> 1

(x, σ L) ≈ s(x) = ∇x log ρ(x). 

• Stage 2 (velocity reconstruction): With the pre-trained score estimate sθ∗ 

> 1

fixed, the ve-locity network vθ2 (x) is trained using the same trajectory data. This is achieved by solving the PDE-constrained optimization problem (3.6) via the stochastic augmented Lagrangian framework. The solution to this problem inherently satisfies the physics constraint (3.1) and, by Theorem 3.1, corresponds to the unique minimum L2-norm velocity field. 13 Remark on implementation In Stage 2, the stochastic augmented Lagrangian method intro-duces several hyperparameters, such as η and a. However, the training results remain relatively insensitive to their specific choices. This is due to the dynamic update of the Lagrange multiplier and penalty factor, governed by the convergence metric (3.11). Moreover, the augmented La-grangian merit function (3.8) is easier to optimize compared to the direct PDE loss (3.4), thereby helping to mitigate common training di ffi culties encountered in standard PINN formulations. Nu-merical results in Section 4 show that this approach consistently achieves smaller PDE residuals than the standard PINN method. The logical flow of the overall PINN-IMSM pipeline is summarized in Figure 3.2. SDE (2.1) with constant isotropic di ff usion Steady-state FP equation (2.8) Score-based FP equation (3.1) Score estimate PDE-constrained optimization problem (3.6) with learned score Velocity re-construction invariant density score function denoising score matching Well-posedness by Theorem 3.1 stochastic augmented Lagrangian approach Algorithm 1 Figure 3.2: Schematic outline of the PINN-IMSM workflow. The goal is to reconstruct the drift term of an SDE from unlabeled trajectory data by combining invariant measure score matching with PINNs. Starting from an SDE with constant isotropic di ff usion, the framework transforms the problem into a steady-state FP equation, which is then reformulated using the score function of the invariant density. The method proceeds in two stages: first, estimating the score function via multi-scale denoising score matching; second, reconstructing the velocity field by solving a well-posed PDE-constrained optimization problem within the stochastic augmented Lagrangian framework. 

# 4 Numerical results 

This section presents numerical examples to demonstrate the performance of the proposed PINN-IMSM framework on several dynamical systems. The goal is to evaluate how well it can recover the underlying velocity field from noisy, unlabeled trajectory data. The method employs two neural networks. The score network sθ1 is a six-layer multilayer perceptron (MLP) with 64 neurons per hidden layer, and the velocity network vθ2 is a six-layer MLP with 128 neurons per hidden layer. Both networks employ the Swish activation function [46] 14 Algorithm 1 PINN-IMSM for velocity field reconstruction from unlabeled trajectory measure-ments. 

Require: trajectory measurements {eXi}Ni=1, maximum number of epochs K for the score network, update tolerance η, convergence tolerance ϵ, initial penalty μinit , penalty update factor a, penalty upper bound μmax , batch size Nb, number of random shu ffl es Nshu ffl e and number of iterations per shu ffl e Naug .

Ensure: optimized score network parameter set θ∗

> 1

choose noise scales {σi}Li=1; initialize θ01 from normal distribution around zero. 

for k = 1, 2, . . . , K do 

compute the loss Ls(θk−11 ) via (2.13) update θk 

> 1

← argmin 

> θ1

Ls(θ1)

end for Ensure: optimized velocity network parameter set θ∗

> 2

λ0 ← 0; initialize θ02 from a normal distribution around zero; set eNbest ← eN(θ02)

for j = 1, 2, . . . , Nshu ffl e do 

Randomly shu ffl e the training data and form batches of size Nb

μ0 ← μinit ∗ ( j + 1) 

for k = 1, 2, . . . , Naug do 

solve (3.8) using SGD update θk 

> 2

← argmin 

> θ2

|| v(θ2)|| 2 + λTk−1 eN(θ2) + μk−1 

> 2

|| eN(θ2)|| 2

if || eN(θk

> 2

)|| 2 ≤ η|| eNbest || 2 then if || eN(θk

> 2

)|| 2 ≤ ϵ then Solution found; terminate with θ∗ 

> 2

= θk

> 2

end if 

λk ← λk−1 + μk−1 eN(θk

> 2

)

eNbest ← eN(θk

> 2

)

μk ← μk−1

else 

λk ← λk−1

μk ← min( a ∗ μk−1, μ max )

end if end for 

λ0 ← λNaug 

end for 

15 and are optimized using Adam [55]. These architectural choices, determined empirically, yield stable performance across all experiments. For each example, the training data are generated by simulating the SDE (2.5), where the true drift velocity is given in the ODE form ˙ x = v(x), and the di ff usion coe ffi cient D controls the noise level. We integrate the SDE numerically using the Euler–Maruyama method: given a time step ∆t,the trajectory is updated as 

Xj+1 = Xj + v(Xj)∆t + √2Dξj

√∆t, (4.1) where {ξj} are independent standard normal random vectors in Rd. From the resulting long-time simulations, we collect point samples to form the training dataset. To visualize the results, we estimate the invariant density by simulating long-time trajectories (again with the Euler–Maruyama scheme) and binning the samples into a two-dimensional his-togram. We report two density estimates: a reference density obtained from simulations using the true drift velocity and a learned density obtained from simulations using our reconstructed veloc-ity field vθ∗ 

> 2

. Most examples show the densities using hexagonal bins for a smooth visualization. For direct comparison with prior work [10], Example 4.1 employs rectangular bins. In all figures, “Aug lag” denotes PINN-IMSM implemented with the stochastic augmented Lagrangian method in Section 3.3. 

Example 4.1 (Van der Pol oscillator). In this example, we consider the Van der Pol oscillator [56] with the drift velocity ( ˙x = y,

˙y = c 1 − x2 y − x, (4.2) where c = 0.5. The di ff usion coe ffi cient is set as D = 0.05. Figure 4.1 compares the reference system (top row) with the PINN-IMSM reconstruction (bot-tom row). The top row displays the ground-truth velocity field (left), the corresponding reference invariant density (middle), and noisy trajectory samples that that serve as the training data (right). The bottom row shows the results of the proposed PINN-IMSM method: the reconstructed veloc-ity field vθ∗ 

> 2

(left), the learned invariant density induced by this field (middle), and representative trajectories generated by Langevin dynamics driven by the learned score network sθ∗ 

> 1

(right). The Langevin samples provide an independent check of the score estimation quality. We observe that the reconstructed velocity deviates from the ground-truth field in regions far from the attracting limit cycle, where trajectory data are sparse and the drift velocity is therefore weakly identified. However, these regions carry little probability mass under the invariant measure. Consequently, the learned dynamics still reproduce the invariant density with high fidelity in the high-probability region around the attracting set. This indicates that the PINN-IMSM method captures the correct long-time statistical structure even where the drift velocity is not tightly constrained in low-density, poorly sampled regions. Both densities use rectangular bins for direct comparison with [10]. Under this matched discretization, the learned invariant density agrees well with those in [10]. Figure 4.2 further compares the PDE residual during training for the standard PINN and the proposed PINN-IMSM (“Aug lag”). It can be observed that the proposed PINN-IMSM method achieves a much smaller residual, demonstrating the e ff ectiveness of the stochastic augmented Lagrangian method in enforcing the physics constraint. 16 Figure 4.1: Van der Pol oscillator (4.2) with D = 0.05. Top: ground-truth velocity field (left), reference invariant density (middle), and noisy trajectory samples (right). Bottom: PINN-IMSM reconstructed velocity field vθ∗ 

> 2

(left), learned invariant density (middle), and samples generated by Langevin dynamics from the learned score sθ∗ 

> 1

(right). 17 Figure 4.2: PDE residual during training for the standard PINN and PINN-IMSM (“Aug lag”) on the Van der Pol oscillator. 

Example 4.2 (Active swimmer in an anharmonic trap). We consider a model from active matter describing the motion of a motile swimmer in an anharmonic trap [57]. The two-dimensional state (x, ν ) evolves with the drift velocity ˙x = −x3 + ν, 

˙ν = −γν, (4.3) where γ = 0.1, and the di ff usion coe ffi cient is set to D = 1.0. Figure 4.3 compares the learned invariant density from the PINN-IMSM method with the ref-erence density for the active swimmer system. For conciseness, we show only the density visual-izations in this example. The close visual agreement demonstrates that the PINN-IMSM method captures the invariant statistics induced by the stochastically forced dynamics. 

Example 4.3 (Lorenz-63 system). We consider the Lorenz-63 system [58], a canonical chaotic model. The drift velocity is given by 



˙x = c1(y − x),

˙y = x(c2 − z) − y,

˙z = xy − c3z,

(4.4) where ( c1, c2, c3) = (10 , 28 , 8/3). The di ff usion coe ffi cient is taken as D = 10. The Lorenz-63 system presents a known challenge for the simultaneous reconstruction of all three velocity components. As noted in prior work [10], a learned velocity field may approximate the stationary state (i.e., satisfy the steady-state FP equation) yet fail to satisfy other physical 18 Figure 4.3: Invariant density estimates for the active swimmer model (4.3) with γ = 0.1 and D =

1.0. Left: learned invariant density from the reconstructed velocity. Right: reference invariant density from the ground-truth velocity. 19 properties of the invariant measure. Whether this di ffi culty arises from inherent non-uniqueness in the inverse problem or simply inconvenient local minima during training remains an open question for future investigation. Given this challenge, we evaluate the PINN-IMSM method on partial reconstructions. Fig-ure 4.4 presents the results. The left column shows the ground-truth drift velocity field and the cor-responding reference invariant density. The middle column shows a partial reconstruction where only ˙ x is learned, with ˙ y and ˙ z treated as known. The right column further learns both ˙ x and ˙ y,again with ˙ z treated as known. In all cases, the invariant density is visualized via the empirical oc-cupation measure projected on the ( x, z) plane. Following [9], the occupation measure is formed by randomly subsample trajectories, which confirms that the PINN-IMSM method remains applicable when measurement times are irregular or unavailable. 

Figure 4.4: Lorenz-63 system (4.4) with D = 10. Top: ground-truth velocity field (left), re-constructed velocity learning only ˙ x (middle), and reconstructed velocity learning ˙ x and ˙ y (right). 

Bottom: corresponding invariant densities on the ( x, z) plane. 

Example 4.4 (Lorenz-96 system). We examine the Lorenz-96 system [59, 60], defined for i =

1, . . . , N by dx i

dt = (xi+1 − xi−2)xi−1 − xi + F, (4.5) with periodic indexing: x−1 = xN−1, x0 = xN , and xN+1 = x1. Here F is a constant forcing term, the term −xi represents linear damping, and the quadratic term models advection while conserving 20 kinetic energy in the absence of damping. We set N = 5 and F = 8. The di ff usion coe ffi cient is 

D = 0.05. Given the five-dimensional state space, we visualize the invariant density induced by the recon-structed drift velocity through two-dimensional projection histograms. Figure 4.5 shows represen-tative projection densities, capturing the characteristic statistical structure of the chaotic attractor. These results demonstrate that the PINN-IMSM method is e ff ective in higher-dimensional settings where mesh-based density solvers become computationally prohibitive. 

Figure 4.5: Lorenz-96 system (4.5) with N = 5, F = 8, and D = 0.05. Top: invariant density pro-jections from the PINN-IMSM reconstruction. Bottom: corresponding reference invariant density from the true system. Two-dimensional projection histograms onto ( x1, x2), ( x1, x3), ( x1, x4), and (x1, x5) planes. 

# 5 Conclusion 

In this paper, we introduced PINN-IMSM, a novel mesh-free framework for reconstructing dynam-ical systems from unlabeled point-cloud observational data that capture the asymptotic statistical behavior of the underlying system without explicit temporal information. By adopting an Eule-rian perspective and reformulating the stationary FP equation in terms of the score function, our approach overcomes the reliance on time-labeled trajectories required by Lagrangian approaches. The core innovation of the proposed PINN-IMSM method is the integration of denoising score matching with physics-informed neural networks: the score function of the invariant measure is estimated directly from data, circumventing costly density estimation, and is then embedded into a PINN to reconstruct the velocity field under the PDE constraint. To ensure well-posedness in high-dimensional settings, the reconstruction is reformulated as a PDE-constrained optimization that seeks the velocity field with minimal L2-norm, solved e ffi ciently using the stochastic aug-mented Lagrangian method. Numerical experiments on benchmark problems demonstrate that 21 PINN-IMSM achieves accurate and stable reconstruction of dynamical systems, successfully han-dling problems up to five dimensions. This represents a significant advancement over existing mesh-based Eulerian approaches, which are typically limited to low-dimensional problems ( d ≤ 3) due to the curse of dimensionality. Moreover, the method shows robustness in scenarios with incomplete velocity information, faithfully recovering chaotic attractors and complex dynamical behaviors from sparse observational data. The theoretical foundation of our approach is strength-ened by our proof that, under suitable conditions, the inverse problem admits a unique solution that depends continuously on the score function. Future work will extend the current framework to systems with non-constant or anisotropic di ff usion coe ffi cients and develop theoretical tools for more general classes of stochastic dynam-ical systems. Further promising directions include incorporating uncertainty quantification and exploring applications to high-dimensional problems in molecular dynamics, climate modeling, and biological systems. 

# Acknowledgments 

Research work of Y. Chen and X. Zhong was partially supported by National Key R&D Program of China 2024YFA1012302 and NSFC Grant 11871428. 

# References 

[1] Ricky TQ Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and David K Duvenaud. Neural ordinary di ff erential equations. Advances in neural information processing systems , 31, 2018. [2] Gavin D Portwood, Peetak P Mitra, Mateus Dias Ribeiro, Tan Minh Nguyen, Balasubra-manya T Nadiga, Juan A Saenz, Michael Chertkov, Animesh Garg, Anima Anandkumar, An-dreas Dengel, et al. Turbulence forecasting via neural ode. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.05180 ,2019. [3] Alec J Linot and Michael D Graham. Data-driven reduced-order modeling of spatiotemporal chaos with neural ordinary di ff erential equations. Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science , 32(7), 2022. [4] Alec J Linot, Joshua W Burby, Qi Tang, Prasanna Balaprakash, Michael D Graham, and Romit Maulik. Stabilized neural ordinary di ff erential equations for long-time forecasting of dynamical systems. Journal of Computational Physics , 474:111838, 2023. [5] Steven L Brunton, Joshua L Proctor, and J Nathan Kutz. Discovering governing equations from data by sparse identification of nonlinear dynamical systems. Proceedings of the na-tional academy of sciences , 113(15):3932–3937, 2016. [6] Daniel A Messenger and David M Bortz. Weak sindy: Galerkin-based data-driven model selection. Multiscale Modeling & Simulation , 19(3):1474–1497, 2021. 22 [7] Urban Fasel, J Nathan Kutz, Bingni W Brunton, and Steven L Brunton. Ensemble-sindy: Robust sparse model discovery in the low-data, high-noise limit, with active learning and control. Proceedings of the Royal Society A , 478(2260):20210904, 2022. [8] Zhijun Zeng, Pipi Hu, Chenglong Bao, Yi Zhu, and Zuoqiang Shi. Reconstruction of dynam-ical systems from data without time labels. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.04038 , 2023. [9] Yunan Yang, Levon Nurbekyan, Elisa Negrini, Robert Martin, and Mirjeta Pasha. Optimal transport for parameter identification of chaotic dynamics via invariant measures. SIAM Jour-nal on Applied Dynamical Systems , 22(1):269–310, 2023. [10] Jonah Botvinick-Greenhouse, Robert Martin, and Yunan Yang. Learning dynamics on in-variant measures using pde-constrained optimization. Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science , 33(6), 2023. [11] Maziar Raissi, Paris Perdikaris, and George E Karniadakis. Physics-informed neural net-works: A deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving non-linear partial di ff erential equations. Journal of Computational physics , 378:686–707, 2019. [12] George Em Karniadakis, Ioannis G Kevrekidis, Lu Lu, Paris Perdikaris, Sifan Wang, and Liu Yang. Physics-informed machine learning. Nature Reviews Physics , 3(6):422–440, 2021. [13] Sifan Wang, Xinling Yu, and Paris Perdikaris. When and why pinns fail to train: a neural tangent kernel perspective. Journal of Computational Physics , 449:110768, 2022. [14] Ameya D Jagtap, Ehsan Kharazmi, and George Em Karniadakis. Conservative physics-informed neural networks on discrete domains for conservation laws: applications to for-ward and inverse problems. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering ,365:113028, 2020. [15] Simon Stock, Jochen Stiasny, Davood Babazadeh, Christian Becker, and Spyros Chatzi-vasileiadis. Bayesian physics-informed neural networks for robust system identification of power systems. In 2023 IEEE Belgrade PowerTech , pages 1–6. IEEE, 2023. [16] Lu Lu, Pengzhan Jin, Guofei Pang, Zhongqiang Zhang, and George Em Karniadakis. Learn-ing nonlinear operators via deeponet based on the universal approximation theorem of oper-ators. Nature machine intelligence , 3(3):218–229, 2021. [17] Zongyi Li, Nikola Borislavov Kovachki, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Burigede liu, Kaushik Bhattacharya, Andrew Stuart, and Anima Anandkumar. Fourier neural operator for paramet-ric partial di ff erential equations. In International Conference on Learning Representations ,2021. [18] Anima Anandkumar, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Kaushik Bhattacharya, Nikola Kovachki, Zongyi Li, Burigede Liu, and Andrew Stuart. Neural operator: graph kernel network for partial di ff erential equations. In ICLR 2020 workshop on integration of deep neural models and di ff erential equations , 2020. 23 [19] Maarten V. de Hoop, Daniel Zhengyu Huang, Elizabeth Qian, and Andrew M. Stuart. The cost-accuracy trade-o ff in operator learning with neural networks. Journal of Machine Learn-ing , 1(3), 2022. [20] Derick Nganyu Tanyu, Jianfeng Ning, Tom Freudenberg, Nick Heilenk¨ otter, Andreas Rademacher, Uwe Iben, and Peter Maass. Deep learning methods for partial di ff erential equations and related parameter identification problems. Inverse Problems , 39(10):103001, 2023. [21] Zongyi Li, Hongkai Zheng, Nikola Kovachki, David Jin, Haoxuan Chen, Burigede Liu, Kam-yar Azizzadenesheli, and Anima Anandkumar. Physics-informed neural operator for learning partial di ff erential equations. ACM /JMS Journal of Data Science , 1(3):1–27, 2024. [22] Shawn G Rosofsky, Hani Al Majed, and EA Huerta. Applications of physics informed neural operators. Machine Learning: Science and Technology , 4(2):025022, 2023. [23] Aapo Hyv¨ arinen and Peter Dayan. Estimation of non-normalized statistical models by score matching. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 6(4), 2005. [24] Yang Song, Sahaj Garg, Jiaxin Shi, and Stefano Ermon. Sliced score matching: a scalable approach to density and score estimation. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence , pages 574–584. PMLR, 2020. [25] Alp Dener, Marco Andres Miller, Randy Michael Churchill, Todd Munson, and Choong-Seock Chang. Training neural networks under physical constraints using a stochastic aug-mented lagrangian approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.07330 , 2020. [26] Wen Huang, Min Ji, Zhenxin Liu, and Yingfei Yi. Steady states of fokker–planck equations: I. existence. Journal of Dynamics and Di ff erential Equations , 27:721–742, 2015. [27] Igor V Ovchinnikov. Introduction to supersymmetric theory of stochastics. Entropy ,18(4):108, 2016. [28] Peter H Baxendale and Sergey V Lototsky. Stochastic di ff erential equations: theory and applications , volume 2. World Scientific, 2007. [29] Gerhard Keller. Stochastic stability in some chaotic dynamical systems. Monatshefte f¨ ur Mathematik , 94(4):313–333, 1982. [30] Lai-Sang Young. Stochastic stability of hyperbolic attractors. Ergodic Theory and Dynamical Systems , 6(2):311–319, 1986. [31] William Cowieson and Lai-Sang Young. Srb measures as zero-noise limits. Ergodic Theory and dynamical systems , 25(4):1115–1138, 2005. [32] Richard Ernest Bellman. Adaptive control processes: a guided tour . Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1961. 24 [33] Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic di ff erential equations. In International Conference on Learning Representations ,2021. [34] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising di ff usion probabilistic models. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 33, pages 6840–6851, 2020. [35] Pascal Vincent. A connection between score matching and denoising autoencoders. Neural computation , 23(7):1661–1674, 2011. [36] Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Generative modeling by estimating gradients of the data distribution. Advances in neural information processing systems , 32, 2019. [37] Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Improved techniques for training score-based generative models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:12438–12448, 2020. [38] Alfio Quarteroni and Alberto Valli. Numerical approximation of partial di ff erential equa-tions , volume 23. Springer Science & Business Media, 2008. [39] Susanne C Brenner. The mathematical theory of finite element methods . Springer, 2008. [40] Atilim Gunes Baydin, Barak A Pearlmutter, Alexey Andreyevich Radul, and Je ff rey Mark Siskind. Automatic di ff erentiation in machine learning: a survey. Journal of Machine Learn-ing Research , 18(153):1–43, 2017. [41] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: a method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 , 2014. [42] Dong C Liu and Jorge Nocedal. On the limited memory bfgs method for large scale opti-mization. Mathematical Programming , 45(1-3):503–528, 1989. [43] Teeratorn Kadeethum, Thomas M Jørgensen, and Hamidreza M Nick. Physics-informed neural networks for solving inverse problems of nonlinear biot’s equations: batch training. In 

ARMA US Rock Mechanics /Geomechanics Symposium , pages ARMA–2020. ARMA, 2020. [44] Ivan Depina, Saket Jain, Sigurdur Mar Valsson, and Hrvoje Gotovac. Application of physics-informed neural networks to inverse problems in unsaturated groundwater flow. Georisk: Assessment and Management of Risk for Engineered Systems and Geohazards , 16(1):21–36, 2022. [45] Quan Guo, Yue Zhao, Chunhui Lu, and Jian Luo. High-dimensional inverse modeling of hydraulic tomography by physics informed neural network (ht-pinn). Journal of Hydrology ,616:128828, 2023. [46] Ste ff en Eger, Paul Youssef, and Iryna Gurevych. Is it time to swish? comparing deep learning activation functions across nlp tasks. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 4415–4424, 2018. 25 [47] Maziar Raissi, Alireza Yazdani, and George Em Karniadakis. Hidden fluid mechanics: Learn-ing velocity and pressure fields from flow visualizations. Science , 367(6481):1026–1030, 2020. [48] Ian Goodfellow. Deep learning, 2016. [49] Kurt Hornik, Maxwell Stinchcombe, and Halbert White. Multilayer feedforward networks are universal approximators. Neural networks , 2(5):359–366, 1989. [50] Tianping Chen and Hong Chen. Universal approximation to nonlinear operators by neural networks with arbitrary activation functions and its application to dynamical systems. IEEE transactions on neural networks , 6(4):911–917, 1995. [51] Lu Lu, Rapha¨ el Pestourie, Wenjie Yao, Zhicheng Wang, Francesc Verdugo, and Steven G. Johnson. Physics-informed neural networks with hard constraints for inverse design. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing , 43(6):B1105–B1132, 2021. [52] Yaohua Zang, Gang Bao, Xiaojing Ye, and Haomin Zhou. Weak adversarial networks for high-dimensional partial di ff erential equations. Journal of Computational Physics ,411:109409, 2020. [53] Magnus R Hestenes. Multiplier and gradient methods. Journal of optimization theory and applications , 4(5):303–320, 1969. [54] Michael JD Powell. A method for nonlinear constraints in minimization problems. Optimiza-tion , pages 283–298, 1969. [55] Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2018. [56] John Guckenheimer. Dynamics of the van der pol equation. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems , 27(11):983–989, 2003. [57] Julien Tailleur and Michael E Cates. Statistical mechanics of interacting run-and-tumble bacteria. Physical review letters , 100(21):218103, 2008. [58] Stefano Luzzatto, Ian Melbourne, and Frederic Paccaut. The lorenz attractor is mixing. Com-munications in Mathematical Physics , 260:393–401, 2005. [59] Edward Ott, Brian R Hunt, Istvan Szunyogh, Aleksey V Zimin, Eric J Kostelich, Matteo Corazza, Eugenia Kalnay, DJ Patil, and James A Yorke. A local ensemble kalman filter for at-mospheric data assimilation. Tellus A: Dynamic Meteorology and Oceanography , 56(5):415– 428, 2004. [60] Alireza Karimi and Mark R Paul. Extensive chaos in the lorenz-96 model. Chaos: An interdisciplinary journal of nonlinear science , 20(4), 2010. [61] Steven George Krantz and Harold R Parks. The implicit function theorem: history, theory, and applications . Springer Science & Business Media, 2002. 26 [62] Alexandre Ern, Jean-Luc Guermond, et al. Finite elements II . Springer, 2021. [63] Lawrence C Evans. Partial di ff erential equations , volume 19. American Mathematical Soci-ety, 2022. [64] David Gilbarg, Neil S Trudinger, David Gilbarg, and NS Trudinger. Elliptic partial di ff eren-tial equations of second order , volume 224. Springer, 1977. 

# A Proof of Theorem 3.1 

In this section, we show the detailed proof of Theorem 3.1 in Section 3.3.2. This section is orga-nized as follows: in Section A.1, we introduce the necessary notations, function spaces, norms, and preliminary lemmas. In Section A.2, we present the existence and regularity of the forward prob-lem, which establishes an important relationship between the score function and the velocity field. Finally, in Section A.3, we complete the proof of Theorem 3.1 that ensuring the well-posedness of the inverse problem. 

# A.1 Preliminaries 

We first introduce function spaces used throughout the proof. We consider the standard continuous function space Cm(Ω) for m ≥ 2 equipped with the norm ∥ · ∥ Cm , and the space Cm,1(Ω) of m-times continuously di ff erentiable functions whose m-th derivatives are Lipschitz continuous. We also employ the Sobolev spaces Wm,p(Ω) for m ≥ 0 and 1 ≤ p ≤ ∞ equipped with the norm ∥ · ∥ Wm,p .The Hilbert space is denoted by Hm(Ω) for m ≥ 0 equipped with the norm ∥ · ∥ Hm ; in particular, 

H0(Ω) = L2(Ω) with the L2 norm denoted simply by ∥ · ∥ . The dual space of H1(Ω) is denoted by 

H−1(Ω). For vector fields we use the standard Hilbert space 

H(div; Ω) : = nv ∈ L2(Ω; Rd) : ∇· v ∈ L2(Ω)o, ∥v∥2 

> H(div)

:= ∥v∥2 

> L2

+ ∥∇· v∥2 

> L2

.

We also employ the following subspaces and local spaces: 

H1 

> ⋄

(Ω) : = nw ∈ H1(Ω) : 

Z

> Ω

w dx = 0o.

and Hm

> loc

(Ω) consisting of functions belonging to Hm on every compact subset of Ω.The following classical results are essential for our analysis. 

Theorem A.1 (Implicit Function Theorem [61, Theorem 3.3.1]) . Let X, Y, Z be Banach spaces and let U ⊂ X, V ⊂ Y be open sets. Suppose F : U × V → Z is continuously Fr´ echet di ff erentiable. If there exist ( x0, y0) ∈ U × V such that 

F(x0, y0) = 0 and DyF(x0, y0) : Y → Z is a bounded linear isomorphism ,

then there exist neighborhoods U0 ⊂ U of x0 and V0 ⊂ V of y0, and a unique continuously di ff er-entiable mapping g : U0 → V0 such that 

F(x, g(x)) = 0 for all x ∈ U0, g(x0) = y0.

Moreover, if F ∈ Ck then g ∈ Ck, and Dg (x) = − DyF(x, g(x)) −1Dx F(x, g(x)) for x ∈ U0.27 A.2 Existence and regularity of the forward problem 

We consider the stationary FP equation (2.8) with the boundary condition (2.7) in divergence form 

∇·   − D∇ρ + ρ v = 0 in Ω, (A.1) (D∇ρ − ρ v) · n = 0 on ∂Ω, (A.2) where v is a given velocity. The weak formulation of the problem (A.1) is: find ρ ∈ H1(Ω) such that 

a(ρ, φ ) : =

Z

> Ω

 D∇ρ − ρ v · ∇ φ dx = 0, ∀φ ∈ H1(Ω). (A.3) The bilinear form a(·, ·) is bounded on H1(Ω) × H1(Ω), since by Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, for any u, φ ∈ H1(Ω), 

|a(u, φ )| ≤ D∥∇ u∥L2 ∥∇ φ∥L2 + ∥v∥L∞ ∥u∥L2 ∥∇ φ∥L2 ≤ C∥u∥H1 ∥φ∥H1 . (A.4) Moreover, a direct computation yields the Gårding inequality. 

a(u, u) = D∥∇ u∥2 

> L2

−

Z

> Ω

u v · ∇ u dx ≥ D

2 ∥∇ u∥2 

> L2

− ∥v∥2

> L∞

2D ∥u∥2 

> L2

. (A.5) The following proposition clarifies that a weak solution satisfies the boundary condition. Its proof follows the arguments of [62, Proposition 31.13] with the di ff usion flux taken as σ = −D∇ρ+

ρ v.

Proposition 1 (Weak solution) . Let ρ solve (A.3) with v ∈ L∞(Ω; Rd). Then, the PDE in (A.1) holds almost everywhere in Ω and the boundary condition holds almost everywhere on ∂Ω.

Lemma A.1 (Existence, uniqueness and interior regularity) . Assume v ∈ L∞(Ω; Rd) and ∇ · v ∈

L∞(Ω). Let CP be the Poincar´ e constant on H1 

> ⋄

(Ω), i.e., ∥w∥L2 ≤ CP∥∇ w∥L2 for all w ∈ H1 

> ⋄

(Ω). If the di ff usion coe ffi cient satisfies D > ∥v∥L∞(Ω) CP, then the boundary value problem (A.1) admits a unique weak solution ρ ∈ H1(Ω) satisfying the normalization R 

> Ω

ρ dx = 1. Moreover, ρ ∈ W2,p 

> loc

(Ω)for all 1 < p < ∞. If, in addition, v ∈ Wm,∞(Ω) for some integer m ≥ 2, then ρ ∈ Hm

> loc

(Ω). 

Proof. The function ρ ∈ H1(Ω) with the normalization condition R 

> Ω

ρ dx = 1 can be decomposed as 

ρ = c + u,

where the constant c = 1 

> |Ω|

, and u ∈ H1 

> ⋄

(Ω). Then the problem (A.3) is equivalent to: find u ∈ H1 

> ⋄

(Ω)such that 

a(u, φ ) =

Z

> Ω

c v · ∇ φ dx ≜ F(φ), ∀ φ ∈ H1 

> ⋄

(Ω). (A.6) Clearly F is a bounded linear functional on H1 

> ⋄

(Ω). Indeed, for any φ ∈ H1 

> ⋄

(Ω), 

|F(φ)| =

Z

> Ω

c v · ∇ φ dx ≤ c ∥v∥L∞(Ω) ∥∇ φ∥L2(Ω) ≤ C ∥φ∥H1(Ω).

28 Moreover, for any w ∈ H1 

> ⋄

(Ω), it follows from the Gårding inequality (A.5) and the Poincar´ einequality that 

a(w, w) ≥ D

2 ∥∇ w∥2 

> L2

− ∥v∥2

> L∞

2D ∥w∥2 

> L2

≥  D

2 − ∥v∥2

> L∞

2D C2

> P

∥∇ w∥2 

> L2

= κ ∥∇ w∥2 

> L2

,

where κ = D 

> 2

− ∥v∥2 

> L∞
> 2D

C2

> P

. The condition D > ∥v∥L∞(Ω) CP ensures κ > 0. Since ∥w∥2 

> H1

= ∥w∥2 

> L2

+

∥∇ w∥2 

> L2

≤ (1 + C2

> P

)∥∇ w∥2 

> L2

on H1 

> ⋄

(Ω), we obtain 

a(w, w) ≥ κ

1 + C2

> P

∥w∥2 

> H1

.

Thus the bilinear form a(·, ·) is coercive on H1 

> ⋄

(Ω). Together with its boundedness established in (A.4), the Lax-Milgram theorem [63, Theorem 6.2]) yields a unique u ∈ H1 

> ⋄

(Ω) solving (A.6), which also solves (A.3). Setting ρ = c + u gives a weak solution of (A.1) with R 

> Ω

ρ dx = 1. It follows from Proposition 1 that ρ satisfies (A.1) almost everywhere, which can be rewritten as the non-divergence form: 

−D∆ρ + v · ∇ ρ + (∇ · v)ρ = 0.

Standard Lp-regularity [64, Theorems 9.11 and 9.15] implies that ρ belongs to W2,p 

> loc

(Ω) for all 1 < p < ∞. Furthermore, if v ∈ Wm,∞ for some integer m ≥ 2, then ∇ · v ∈ Wm−1,∞. Since 

Wk,∞(Ω) ,→ Ck−1,1(Ω) for k ≥ 1 by the Sobolev embedding theorem, the coe ffi cients of the elliptic equation are of class Cm−2,1 in the interior. Applying higher-order interior regularity theory for elliptic equations [64, Theorem 8.12]), we obtain ρ ∈ Hm

> loc

(Ω). □

The condition D > |v|L∞(Ω)CP serves as a su ffi cient condition to ensure the coercivity of the bi-linear form a(·, ·), thereby enabling the direct application of the Lax-Milgram theorem. Physically, this corresponds to a di ff usion-dominated regime (or a small P´ eclet number regime), where the stochastic di ff usion is strong enough to counteract the deterministic drift, ensuring a stable station-ary distribution. While the well-posedness of the FP equation may hold under weaker assumptions (e.g., via the Fredholm alternative for convection-dominated flows), this condition provides a rig-orous and simplified framework su ffi cient for establishing the stability of the inverse problem. The normalization condition R 

> Ω

ρ dx = 1 is consistent with the constraints (2.3) for the FP equation. Lemma A.1 guarantees the existence and interior regularity of the stationary density ρ.Consequently, whenever ρ > 0 on a subset Ω′ ⊂ Ω with Ω′ compact in Ω, and ρ ∈ Hm

> loc

(Ω) with 

m > d/2 + 1, its score function 

s = ∇ log ρ = ∇ρρ

is well defined on Ω′ and belongs to Hm−1(Ω′). In what follows we simply take s as a given element of W1,∞(Ω; Rd) and study the constrained optimization problem associated with s. This regularity assumption is natural in the context of elliptic regularity theory: for su ffi ciently smooth velocity fields v and under a uniform positivity condition on ρ, the stationary FP equation indeed yields a score function with bounded first derivatives. 29 A.3 Well-posedness of the constrained optimization 

We now analyze the optimization problem (3.5) min  

> v

J(v) : = 12 ∥v∥2 

> L2(Ω)

subject to eN(s, v) = 0 in L2(Ω). (A.7) where eN(s, v) = s·v + ∇· v − D |s|2 + ∇· s. Throughout this subsection, we assume the score 

s is given with the regularity that can be justified under suitable conditions on the velocity field, as discussed after Lemma A.1. 

Lemma A.2 (Existence and uniqueness of the minimizer) . Let s ∈ L∞(Ω; Rd) with ∇· s ∈ L2(Ω). Define the linear operator Cs : H(div; Ω) → L2(Ω): 

Cs(v) = s·v + ∇· v,

and let gs = D |s|2 + ∇· s. Then the feasible set 

Vad (s) : = {v ∈ H(div; Ω) : Cs(v) = gs}

is a nonempty closed a ffi ne subspace of H(div; Ω). Consequently, the problem (A.7) admits a unique minimizer v∗ ∈ V ad (s). 

Proof. The set Vad (s) is a ffi ne because it is the inverse image of a single element under the linear operator Cs. It is nonempty since v0 = D s ∈ H(div; Ω) satisfies 

Cs(v0) = s·(Ds) + ∇· (Ds) = D |s|2 + ∇· s = gs.

For any v ∈ H(div; Ω), 

∥C s(v)∥L2 ≤ ∥ s∥L∞ ∥v∥L2 + ∥∇· v∥L2 ≤ C ∥v∥H(div) ,

hence Cs is continuous and Vad (s) is closed. The objective J(v) = 12 ∥v∥2 

> L2(Ω)

is strongly continuous and strictly convex on the Hilbert space 

H(div; Ω). Thus it is also weakly lower semicontinuous. The constraint in (A.7) can be written as 

Cs(v) = gs in L2(Ω) (via the continuous embedding H(div; Ω) ,→ L2(Ω; Rd)). Let {vn} ⊂ V ad (s)be a minimizing sequence. Since {J(vn)} is bounded, {vn} is bounded in L2(Ω); hence, up to a subsequence, vn ⇀ v∗ weakly in L2(Ω). Because Vad (s) is a closed convex subset of H(div; Ω) and 

Cs is continuous, the limit v∗ is feasible, i.e., v∗ ∈ V ad (s). By weak lower semicontinuity of J,

J(v∗) ≤ lim inf  

> n→∞

J(vn) = inf  

> v∈V ad (s)

J(v),

so v∗ is a minimizer. Uniqueness follows from strict convexity of J on the convex set Vad (s). □

Having established the existence and uniqueness of the minimizer for problem (A.7), we next analyze the stability of the solution operator s 7 → v∗ with respect to perturbations in the score function. 30 Lemma A.3 (Continuity of the solution map s 7 → v∗). Assume s ∈ W1,∞(Ω; Rd) with qs ≥ 0 almost everywhere in Ω, where 

qs = |s|2 + ∇· s. (A.8) Let v∗ ∈ H(div; Ω) be the unique minimizer of (A.7). Then there exists a neighborhood U ⊂

W1,∞(Ω; Rd) of s such that, for every es ∈ U, if ev∗ denotes the unique optimizer associated with es,then 

∥v∗ − ev∗∥L2(Ω) ≤ C ∥s − es∥W1,∞(Ω),

where the constant C > 0 depends monotonically on D, Ω, and s.

Proof. We first characterize the minimizer of the constrained optimization problem (A.7) via the Lagrange multiplier method by introducing the Lagrangian functional on H(div; Ω) × H1 

> ⋄

(Ω): 

L(v, λ ; s) = 12 ∥v∥2 

> L2

+  s·v + ∇· v − Dq s, λ L2 ,

where ( ·, ·)L2 denotes the L2-inner product, i.e., ( f, g)L2 := R 

> Ω

f (x)g(x) dx . Since v∗ is a minimizer of (A.7), the first-order optimality condition implies that the Gˆ ateaux derivative of L with respect to v vanishes at v∗ in every direction ϕ ∈ H(div; Ω), i.e., 

δvL(v∗, λ )[ ϕ] = (v∗, ϕ )L2 +  s·ϕ + ∇· ϕ, λ L2 = 0. (A.9) Recall that the FP equation (2.8) is accompanied by the no-flux boundary condition (2.7), (D∇ρ − ρv) · n = 0, which in terms of the score s = ∇ log ρ = ∇ρ/ρ reads ( v − Ds) · n = 0. We therefore require that the recovered velocity field satisfy the same condition. Consequently, the admissible directions ϕ should preserve this boundary condition, i.e., ϕ · n = 0 on ∂Ω.For λ ∈ H1 

> ⋄

(Ω) and ϕ ∈ H(div; Ω), we interpret the term ( λ, ∇· ϕ)L2 in (A.9) in the distributional sense: (λ, ∇· ϕ)L2 = −(∇λ, ϕ )L2 +

Z

> ∂Ω

λϕ · ndx = − ∇λ, ϕ L2 , (A.10) where the boundary integral vanishes due to ϕ · n = 0. Substituting this into (A.9) yields (v∗, ϕ )L2 −  ∇λ − λs, ϕ L2 = 0 ∀ ϕ ∈ H(div; Ω),

from which we infer the pointwise identity 

v∗ = ∇λ − λs. (A.11) Substituting v∗ = ∇λ − λs into the constraint s·v∗ + ∇· v∗ = D(|s|2 + ∇· s) gives 

−∆λ + qs λ = −Dq s in Ω.

We supplement this equation with the homogeneous Neumann condition ∂nλ = 0 on ∂Ω and the normalization R 

> Ω

λ dx = 0 to obtain a well-posed problem. Its weak formulation reads: find 

λ ∈ H1 

> ⋄

(Ω) such that 

as(λ, φ ) =

Z

> Ω

−Dq s φ dx, ∀ φ ∈ H1 

> ⋄

(Ω), (A.12) 31 where as is the bilinear form defined as 

as(λ, φ ) =

Z

> Ω

∇λ · ∇ φ + qsλφ dx, λ, φ ∈ H1 

> ⋄

(Ω). (A.13) If qs ≥ 0, then the bilinear form as is coercive and bounded on H1 

> ⋄

(Ω) × H1 

> ⋄

(Ω). In fact, by Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, for λ, φ ∈ H1 

> ⋄

(Ω), we have 

|as(λ, φ )| ≤ ∥∇ λ∥L2 ∥∇ φ∥L2 + |qs|L∞ ∥λ∥L2 ∥φ∥L2 ≤ C∥λ∥H1 ∥φ∥H1 , (A.14) 

|as(λ, λ )| = ∥∇ λ∥2 

> L2

+

Z

> Ω

qsλ2dx ≥ ∥∇ λ∥2 

> L2

≥ 11 + C2

> p

∥λ∥2 

> H1

, (A.15) where Cp is the Poincar´ e constant on H1 

> ⋄

(Ω). The right-hand side in (A.12) is bounded on H1 

> ⋄

(Ω). Therefore, by the Lax–Milgram theorem, there exists a unique λ(s) ∈ H1 

> ⋄

(Ω) solving (A.12), and the bound ∥λ(s)∥H1 ≤ C∥qs∥L2 holds. Define 

F : W1,∞(Ω; Rd) × H1 

> ⋄

(Ω) → H−1(Ω), F(es, λ ) : = −∆λ + qesλ + Dq es,

with qes = |es|2 + ∇· es. Then F is continuously Fr´ echet di ff erentiable. We further define 

DλF(s, λ ) = −∆ + qs : H1 

> ⋄

(Ω) → H−1(Ω),

which is associated with the bilinear form as by ( DλF(s, λ )( λ), φ )L2 = as(λ, φ ) for all λ, φ ∈ H1 

> ⋄

(Ω). The coercivity of as implies that the operator DλF(s, λ ) is a bounded linear isomorphism H1 

> ⋄

(Ω) →

H−1(Ω). Hence, by Theorem A.1, there exist a neighborhood U ⊂ W1,∞(Ω; Rd) of s and a C1 map 

Λ : U → H1 

> ⋄

(Ω) such that F(es, Λ(es)) = 0 for all es ∈ U, and Λ is locally Lipschitz in the H1-norm: 

∥Λ(es) − Λ(s)∥H1 ≤ C ∥es − s∥W1,∞ .

From (A.11), for es ∈ U we have 

v∗(es) − v∗(s) = ∇(Λ(es) − Λ(s)) − Λ(es)es + Λ (s) s.

Taking the L2-norm and using the uniform boundedness of Λ(·) on U gives 

∥v∗(es) − v∗(s)∥L2 ≤ C ∥Λ(es) − Λ(s)∥H1 + C ∥Λ(s)∥L2 ∥es − s∥L∞ ≤ C ∥es − s∥W1,∞ .

This proves the claimed local Lipschitz continuity. □

Remark A.1. The condition qs ≥ 0 is su ffi cient to ensure coercivity of the bilinear form as

used in the proof. This can be relaxed to the weaker condition ∥q− 

> s

∥L∞(Ω) < C−2 

> P

, where q− 

> s

(x) =

max {− qs(x), 0} and CP is the Poincar´ e constant for H1 

> ⋄

(Ω). Indeed, under this condition we have 

|as(λ, λ )| ≥ ∥∇ λ∥2 

> L2

−

Z

> Ω

q− 

> s

λ2dx ≥ (1 − C2

> P

∥qs∥L∞ )∥∇ λ∥2 

> L2

≥ 1 − C2

> P

∥qs∥L∞

1 + C2

> p

∥λ∥2 

> H1

,

so that as remains coercive. Hence, all conclusions of the theorem remain valid under this weaker condition. 32 With the lemmas established above, we are ready to prove Theorem 3.1. 

Proof of Theorem 3.1. Under suitable conditions on the velocity field, Lemma A.1 justifies the regularity of the invariant density and thus the regularity of the score function. Given such a score function s, Lemma A.2 establishes the existence and uniqueness of a minimizer v∗ for problem (A.7). Lemma A.3 shows that the solution map s 7 → v∗ is locally Lipschitz continuous from 

W1,∞(Ω; Rd) into L2(Ω; Rd), which yields the stability assertion. This completes the proof of the theorem. □

33